SOURCE: IPBES Global Assessment Report - Summary for Policymakers (https://www.ipbes.net/global-assessment)
TOPIC: biodiversity, habitat_fragmentation, species_richness, human_impact

The global assessment report on SUMMARY FOR POLICYMAKERS OF THE IPBES GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND Copyright © 2019, Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) ISBN No: 978-3-947851-13-3 Reproduction For further information, please contact This publication may be reproduced in whole or in part and in Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and any form for educational or non-profit services without special Ecosystem Services (IPBES) permission from the copyright holder, provided acknowledgement IPBES Secretariat, UN Campus of the source is made. The IPBES secretariat would appreciate Platz der Vereinten Nationen 1, D-53113 Bonn, Germany receiving a copy of any publication that uses this publication as a Phone: +49 (0) 228 815 0570 source. No use of this publication may be made for resale or any Email: secretariat@ipbes.net other commercial purpose whatsoever without prior permission in Website: www.ipbes.net writing from the IPBES secretariat. Applications for such permission, with a statement of the purpose and extent of the reproduction, Photo credits should be addressed to the IPBES secretariat. The use of Cover: Nasa-USGS Landsat_N. Kuring / A. Hendry / information from this publication concerning proprietary products for Shutterstock_E. Teister / C. Mittermeier_SeaLegacy: Kayapo Beauty publicity or advertising is not permitted. – Kubenkrajke, Brazil, 2010 – A young Kayapó girl bathing in the warm waters of the Xingú River in the Brazilian Amazon. The Kayapó Traceable accounts people are tied to the river for their entire lives through ceremony and The chapter references enclosed in curly brackets (e.g.

{2.3.1, necessity and with this, comes in-depth knowledge on how to live in 2.3.1.2, 2.3.1.3}) are traceable accounts and refer to sections balance with nature / Shutterstock_Photocreo M. Bednarek of the chapters of the IPBES Global Assessment. A traceable P. 3: IISD/D. Noguera account is a description within the corresponding texts of these P.4-5: UNEP (J Masuya) / UNESCO (A Azoulay) / FAO (J Graziano chapters, reflecting the evaluation of the type, amount, quality, da Silva) / UNDP (Achim Steiner) / CBD (Cristiana Paşca Palmer) and consistency of evidence and the degree of agreement for that P. 6: D. M. Cáceres (Sandra Díaz) / UFZ_S. Wiedling (Josef Settele) / particular statement or key finding. IISD/ENB_M. Muzurakis (Eduardo S. Brondízio) P. 8-9: Shutterstock_Mazur Travel Disclaimer P. 11: C. Mittermeier /Shutterstock_A. Fortuner / Shutterstock_D. The designations employed and the presentation of material on Mikhail / Shutterstock_Bonga 1965 / B. Vilá the maps used in the present report do not imply the expression P. 13: Shutterstock_Trybex / S. Díaz / Shutterstock_Nimit Virdi of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Intergovernmental P. 20-21: Shutterstock_R. Whitcombe Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services P. 48-49: I. Palomo concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or Technical Support boundaries. These maps have been prepared for the sole purpose Hien T. Ngo (Head) of facilitating the assessment of the broad biogeographical areas Maximilien Guèze represented therein.

Graphic Design Maro Haas, Art direction and layout Yuka Estrada, SPM figures IPBES (2019): Summary for policymakers of the global assessment report on biodiversity and ecosystem services of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. S. Díaz, J. Settele, E. S. Brondízio E.S., H. T. Ngo, M. Guèze, J. Agard, A. Arneth, P. Balvanera, K. A. Brauman, S. H. M. Butchart, K. M. A. Chan, L. A. Garibaldi, K. Ichii, J. Liu, S. M. Subramanian, G. F. Midgley, P. Miloslavich, Z. Molnár, D. Obura, A. Pfaff, S. Polasky, A. Purvis, J. Razzaque, B. Reyers, R. Roy Chowdhury, Y. J. Shin, I. J. Visseren-Hamakers, K. J. Willis, and C. N. Zayas (eds.). IPBES secretariat, Bonn, Germany. 56 pages. MEMBERS OF THE MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE WHO PROVIDED GUIDANCE FOR THE PRODUCTION OF THIS ASSESSMENT Robert T. Watson, Ivar A. Baste, Anne Larigauderie, Paul Leadley, Unai Pascual, Brigitte Baptiste, Sebsebe Demissew, Luthando Dziba, Gunay Erpul, Asghar M. Fazel, Markus Fischer, Ana Maria Hernández, Madhav Karki, Vinod Mathur, Tamar Pataridze, Isabel Sousa Pinto, Marie Stenseke, Katalin Török and Bibiana Vilá. Manuela Carneiro da Cunha, Georgina M. Mace, Harold Mooney.

This report in the form of a PDF can be viewed and downloaded at www.ipbes.net The IPBES global assessment was made possible thanks to many generous contributions including non-earmarked contributions to the IPBES trust fund from Governments (Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Denmark, Estonia, European Union, Finland, France, Germany, India, Japan, Latvia, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Republic of Korea, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States of America); earmarked contributions to the IPBES trust fund toward the global assessment (Germany, Canada, France (Agence Française pour la Biodiversité), Norway, United Kingdom and United States of America); and in-kind contributions targeted at the global assessment. All donors are listed on the IPBES web site: www.ipbes.net/donors The global assessment report on Sandra Díaz (Co-Chair, Argentina), Josef Settele (Co-Chair, Germany), Eduardo Brondízio (Co-Chair, Brazil/United States of America), Hien T. Ngo (IPBES), Maximilien Guèze (IPBES); John Agard (Trinidad and Tobago), Almut Arneth (Germany), Patricia Balvanera (Mexico), Kate Brauman (United States of America), Stuart Butchart (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland/BirdLife International), Kai Chan (Canada), Lucas A. Garibaldi (Argentina), Kazuhito Ichii (Japan), Jianguo Liu (United States of America), Suneetha Mazhenchery Subramanian (India/United Nations University), Guy F.

Midgley (South Africa), Patricia Miloslavich (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela/Australia), Zsolt Molnár (Hungary), David Obura (Kenya), Alexander Pfaff (United States of America), Stephen Polasky (United States of America), Andy Purvis (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland), Jona Razzaque (Bangladesh/United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland), Belinda Reyers (South Africa), Rinku Roy Chowdhury (United States of America), Yunne-Jai Shin (France), Ingrid Visseren-Hamakers (Netherlands/United States of America), Katherine Willis (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland), Cynthia Zayas (Philippines). 1. Authors are listed with, in parenthesis, their country of citizenship, or countries of citizenship separated by a comma when they have several; and, following a slash, their country of affiliation, if different from citizenship, or their organization if they belong to an international organization; name of expert (nationality 1, nationality 2/affiliation). The countries or organizations having nominated these experts are listed on the IPBES website. key objective of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) is to provide Governments, the private sector and civil society with scientifically credible and independent up-to-date assessments of available knowledge for better evidence-informed policy decisions and action at the local, national, regional and global levels. This Global Assessment of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services has been carried out by about 150 selected experts from all regions of the world, including 16 early career fellows, assisted by 350 contributing authors. More than 15,000 scientific publications were analyzed as well as a substantive body of indigenous and local knowledge.

Its chapters were accepted, and its summary for policymakers was approved, by the more than 130 Governments that constitute the Members of IPBES, at the seventh session of the IPBES Plenary (29th April to 4th May, 2019), hosted by France at UNESCO in Paris. This report represents a critical assessment, the first in almost 15 years (since the release of the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment in 2005) and the first ever carried out by an intergovernmental body, of the status and trends of the natural world, the social implications of these trends, their IPBES is an independent intergovernmental body direct and indirect causes, and, importantly, the actions comprising over 130 member Governments. that can still be taken to ensure a better future for all. These Established by Governments in 2012, IPBES complex links have been assessed using a simple, yet very provides policymakers with objective scientific inclusive framework that should resonate with a wide range of assessments about the state of knowledge stakeholders, since it recognizes diverse world views, values regarding the planet’s biodiversity, ecosystems and and knowledge systems. the contributions they make to people, as well as options and actions to protect and sustainably use The concept of nature’s contributions to people, which is these vital natural assets.

discussed in detail in chapter 1, embraces a wide range of descriptions of human-nature interactions, including through The IPBES Global Assessment of Biodiversity the concept of ecosystem services and other descriptions, and Ecosystem Services represents the landmark product of the first work programme of IPBES which range from strongly utilitarian to strongly relational. The (2014-2018). The Global Assessment was initiated concept of nature’s contribution to people was developed to following a decision from the IPBES Plenary at its embrace a fuller and more symmetric consideration of diverse fourth session (IPBES 4, Kuala Lumpur, 2016), and stakeholders and world views, and a richer evidence base considered by the IPBES Plenary at its seventh for action, i.e., the knowledge base offered by the natural session (IPBES 7, Paris, 2019). It is composed of a and social sciences, the humanities, and the knowledge of summary for policymakers, which was approved at practitioners and indigenous and local communities. The IPBES 7, and six chapters, which were accepted at reporting system for nature’s contributions to people has a gradient of complementary and overlapping approaches, ranging from a generalizing to a context-specific perspective. The generalizing perspective is analytical in purpose and is organized into eighteen categories of material, non-material and regulating contributions. The context-specific perspective THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES is typical of indigenous and local knowledge systems, where knowledge production does not typically seek to explicitly extend or validate itself beyond specific geographic and cultural contexts.

In this way, the nature’s contributions to people approach (or the IPBES approach) builds on the existing approaches, descriptors and metrics used by different communities of practice in the search for understanding and solutions. time freely to this important report. We would also like to thank In the last 10-15 years, since the Millennium Ecosystem Hien Ngo and Maximilien Guèze from the technical support Assessment, there has been a significant increase in our unit located at the IPBES secretariat in Bonn, Germany, understanding of biodiversity and ecosystems, as well as their because this report would not have been possible without importance to the quality of life of every person. There is also their extraordinary dedication. Our thanks also go the current greater understanding now about which policies, practices, and former members of the Multidisciplinary Expert Panel technologies and behaviors can best lead to the conservation (MEP) and of the Bureau who provided guidance as part of and sustainable use of biodiversity and the achievement the management committee for this report, and to members of many of the Sustainable Development Goals, the Aichi of other technical support units within the IPBES secretariat, Biodiversity Targets and the Paris Agreement on Climate who have supported the production of this report. We would Change. However, biodiversity is still being lost, ecosystems also like to thank all Governments and other institutions that are still being degraded and many of nature’s contributions to provided financial and in-kind support for the preparation of people are being compromised.

this assessment. The Assessment is critical today because evidence has The IPBES Global Assessment of Biodiversity and Ecosystem accumulated that the multiple threats to biodiversity have Services, together with the four IPBES regional assessments intensified since previous reports, and that the sustainable use of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, and the two of nature will be vital for adapting to and mitigating dangerous thematic Assessments of Pollination, Pollinators and Food anthropogenic interference with the climate system, as well as Production, and of Land Degradation and Restoration, form for achieving many of our most important development goals. an impressive corpus of knowledge to make better-informed decisions regarding the conservation and sustainable use The findings of this Assessment focus on the global scale, of biodiversity. The IPBES Global Assessment is expected spanning the period from the 1970s to 2050. They are based to be an important evidence base for the assessment of on an unprecedented collection of evidence, integrating progress towards the achievement of the Aichi Biodiversity natural and social science perspectives, a range of knowledge Targets in the fifth edition of the Global Biodiversity Outlook systems and multiple dimensions of value. This is the first and to play a major role in the consideration of the post 2020 global-level assessment to systematically consider evidence biodiversity framework by the 15th Conference of the Parties about the contributions of indigenous and local knowledge to the Convention on Biological Diversity, in October 2020.

It and practices, and issues concerning Indigenous Peoples and is also expected to inform implementation of the 2030 Agenda Local Communities. All these features result in a more holistic for Sustainable Development, the Sustainable Development assessment of indirect drivers as root causes of changes Goals and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. It is our in nature and the associated risks to the quality of life of sincere hope that the IPBES Global Assessment will continue all people. to place biodiversity at the top of the global political agenda, with similar priority to that accorded to climate change. The As the Chair and the Executive Secretary of IPBES, we wish to process leading to COP 15 offers this opportunity. recognize the excellent and dedicated work of the co-chairs, Professors Sandra Díaz (Argentina), Eduardo S. Brondízio Sir Robert T.

Watson (Brazil and USA), and Josef Settele (Germany) and of all Chair of IPBES from 2016 to 2019 the coordinating lead authors, lead authors, review editors, fellows, contributing authors and reviewers, and to warmly Anne Larigauderie thank them for their commitment, and for contributing their Executive Secretary of IPBES THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES Nature makes human This essential report The Global assessment of development possible but reminds each of us of the biodiversity and ecosystem our relentless demand for obvious truth: the present services adds a major the earth’s resources is accelerating generations have the responsibility element to the body of evidence for extinction rates and devastating the to bequeath to future generations a the importance of biodiversity to world’s ecosystems. UN planet that is not irreversibly efforts to achieve the Zero Hunger Environment is proud to support the damaged by human activity. Our objective and meet the Sustainable Global Assessment Report local, indigenous and scientific Development Goals. Together, produced by the Intergovernmental knowledge are proving that we have assessments undertaken by IPBES, Science-Policy Platform on solutions and so no more excuses: FAO, CBD and other organizations Biodiversity and Ecosystem we must live on earth differently.

point to the urgent need for action Services because it highlights the UNESCO is committed to to better conserve and sustainably critical need to integrate biodiversity promoting respect of the living and use biodiversity and to the considerations in global decision- of its diversity, ecological solidarity importance of cross-sectoral and making on any sector or challenge, with other living species, and to multidisciplinary collaboration whether its water or agriculture, establish new, equitable and global among decision-makers and other infrastructure or business. links of partnership and stakeholders at all levels. intragenerational solidarity, for the perpetuation of humankind. Joyce Masuya José Graziano da Silva Acting Executive Director, Director-General, United Nations Environment Programme Audrey Azoulay Food and Agriculture Organization of (UNEP) the United Nations (FAO) Director-General, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES Across cultures, humans The IPBES’ 2019 Global course for a post 2020 ecologically inherently value nature. Assessment Report on focused sustainable development The magic of seeing Biodiversity and pathway to deliver multiple benefits fireflies flickering long into the night Ecosystem Services comes at a for people, the planet and our global is immense. We draw energy and critical time for the planet and all its economy. The IPBES report will nutrients from nature. We find peoples.

The report’s findings — serve as a fundamental baseline of sources of food, medicine, and the years of diligent work by the where we are and where we need livelihoods and innovation in many scientists who contributed— to go as a global community to nature. Our well-being will offer a comprehensive view of inspire humanity to reach the 2050 fundamentally depends on nature. the current conditions of global Vision of the UN Biodiversity Our efforts to conserve biodiversity biodiversity. Healthy biodiversity is Convention “Living in harmony with and ecosystems must be the essential infrastructure that nature”. I want to extend my thanks underpinned by the best science supports all forms of life on earth, and congratulations to the IPBES that humanity can produce. This is including human life. It also provides community for their hard work, why the scientific evidence nature-based solutions on many of immense contributions and compiled in this IPBES Global the most critical environmental, continued partnership. Assessment is so important. It will economic, and social challenges help us build a stronger foundation that we face as human society, Dr. Cristiana Paşca Palmer for shaping the post 2020 global including climate change, Executive Secretary, biodiversity framework: the ‘New sustainable development, health, Convention on Biological Diversity Deal for Nature and People’; and and water and food security. We are (CBD) for achieving the SDGs.

currently in the midst of preparing for the 2020 UN Biodiversity Conference, in China, which will Achim Steiner mark the close of the Aichi Administrator, Biodiversity Targets and set the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES he co-chairs of the IPBES Global Assessment Report of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services wish to thank the people and institutions that helped to make the Report possible. We are first indebted to the hundreds of experts in biophysical and social sciences, policymakers and practitioners, as well as representatives of Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities, who generously contributed their time and knowledge, as lead authors, building technical support unit (NEA, Norway). We also chapter scientists, resource person, and/or review editors thank the data visualization specialist and the graphic (listed below), and to all contributing authors. We are designer for their skillful work. We would like to thank the fortunate to have had the opportunity to work with such an IPBES communications team, for their outstanding work engaged, collegial and superb group of authors. communicating the main messages to the general public.

We are grateful to the members of the IPBES secretariat, We are also grateful to all supportive Governments but in particularly Executive Secretary Anne Larigauderie, the particular the Governments of Germany, South Africa, Norway, IPBES Chair (Robert Watson), representatives of member the United Kingdom, France, and the Netherlands as well as States, the Multidisciplinary Expert Panel and Bureau to the Córdoba Province (Argentina), who generously hosted and other resource persons for their dedication, strategic our chapter and/or author meetings. The co-chairs would vision, constructive comments and continued advice. especially like to acknowledge the support of their home The Global Assessment would not have been possible institutions and governments: the Helmholtz Centre for without the titanic effort of its technical support unit (Hien Environmental Research – UFZ (Germany), iDiv (the German T. Ngo and Maximilien Guèze) during the whole process, Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research), Universidad including the long and challenging seventh session of the Nacional de Córdoba and CONICET (Argentina), and Indiana IPBES Plenary (#IPBES7), which resulted in the approval University-Bloomington (USA). Finally, our gratitude goes of this Summary for Policymakers and the acceptance to the Government of France for hosting #IPBES 7 and to of the underlying chapters. In addition, we are thankful UNESCO for providing the venue and support.

The dedication for the support of several IPBES technical support and contributions of all of the governments, organizations units, and their host institutions at different stages of the and people above made the Global Assessment possible and process: Knowledge and data technical support unit impactful and for that we are deeply indebted and appreciative. (NIE, Republic of Korea), indigenous and local knowledge technical support unit (UNESCO), scenarios and models Sandra Díaz, Josef Settele, Eduardo S. Brondízio technical support unit (PBL, Netherlands), and the capacity Co-Chairs We are grateful to the following lead authors, fellows and chapter scientists of the IPBES Global Assessment: C. Adams, J. Agard, A. P. D. Aguiar, D. Armenteras, A. Arneth, Y. Aumeeruddy-Thomas, X. Bai, P. Balvanera, T. Bekele Gode, E. Bennett, Y. A. Boafo, A. K. Boedhihartono, P. Brancalion, K. Brauman, E. Bukvareva, S. Butchart, K. Chan, N. Chettri, W. L. Cheung, B. Czúcz, F. DeClerck, E. Dulloo, B. Gabrielyan, L. Galetto, K. Galvin, E. García Frapolli, L. Garibaldi, A. P. Gautam, L. R. Gerber, A. Geschke, J. Gutt, S. Hashimoto, A. Heinimann, A. Hendry, G. C. Hernández Pedraza, T. Hickler, A. I. Horcea-Milcu, S. A. Hussain, K. Ichii, M. Islar, U. Jacob, W. Jetz, J. Jetzkowitz, Md S. Karim, E. Kelemen, E. Keskin, P. Kindlmann, M. Kok, M. Kolb, Z. Krenova, P. Leadley, J. Liu, J. Liu, G. Lui, M. Mastrangelo, P. McElwee, L. Merino, G. F. Midgley, P. Miloslavich, P. A. Minang, A. Mohammed, Z. Molnár, I. B. Mphangwe Kosamu, E. Mungatana, R.

Muradian, M. Murray-Hudson, N. Nagabhatla, A. Niamir, N. Nkongolo, T. Oberdorff, D. Obura, P. O’Farrell, P. Osano, B. Öztürk, H. Palang, M. G. Palomo, M. Panahi, U. Pascual, A. Pfaff, R. Pichs Madruga, S. Polasky, A. Purvis, J. Razzaque, B. Reyers, V. Reyes-García, C. Rondinini, R. Roy Chowdhury, G. M. Rusch, O. Saito, J. Sathyapalan, T. Satterfield, A. K. Saysel, E. R. Selig, R. Seppelt, L. Shannon, Y. J. Shin, A. Simcock, G. S. Singh, B. Strassburg, S. Subramanian, D. Tarkhnishvili, E. Turnhout, M. Verma, A. Viña, I. Visseren-Hamakers, M. J. Williams, K. Willis, H. Xu, D. Xue, T. Yue, C. Zayas, L. Balint, Z. Basher, I. Chan, A. Fernandez- Llamazares, P. Jaureguiberry, M. Lim, A. J. Lynch, A. Mohamed, T. H. Mwampamba, I. Palomo, P. Pliscoff, R. Salimov, A. Samakov, O. Selomane, U. B. Shrestha, A. Sidorovich, R. Krug, J.H. Spangenberg, E. Strombom, N. Titeux, M. Wiemers, and D. Zaleski. Review editors: M. Carneiro da Cunha, G. Mace, H. Mooney, R. Dirzo, S. Demissew, H. Arceo, S. Asah, E. Lambin, J. Mistry, T. Brooks, F. Berkes, M. Chytry, K. Esler, J. Carabias Lillo and J. Plesnik. The IPBES Management Committee for the Global Assessment and resource persons: R. T. Watson, I. A. Baste, A. Larigauderie, P. Leadley, U. Pascual, D. Cooper, B. Baptiste, S. Demissew, L. Dziba, G. Erpul, A. Fazel, M. Fischer, A. M. Hernández, M. Karki, V. Mathur, T. Pataridze, I. Sousa Pinto, M. Stenseke, K. Török and B. Vilá.

THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES page 2 page 4 STATEMENTS FROM KEY PARTNERS page 6 page 9 A. Nature and its vital contributions to people B. Direct and indirect drivers of change C. Goals for conserving and sustainably using nature and achieving sustainability D. Nature can be conserved, restored and used sustainably page 21 A. Nature and its vital contributions to people B. Direct and indirect drivers of change C. Goals for conserving and sustainably using nature and achieving sustainability D. Nature can be conserved, restored and used sustainably page 49 Conceptual framework and definitions Communication of the degree of confidence Knowledge gaps Draft table of knowledge gaps THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES energy needs, an estimated 4 billion people rely primarily on natural medicines for their health care and some 70 per cent of drugs used for cancer are natural or are synthetic products inspired by nature. Nature, through its ecological and evolutionary processes, sustains the quality of the air, fresh water and soils on which humanity depends, distributes fresh water, regulates the climate, provides A. Nature and its vital contributions pollination and pest control and reduces the impact of natural hazards.

For example, more than 75 per cent of to people, which together embody global food crop types, including fruits and vegetables and biodiversity and ecosystem some of the most important cash crops, such as coffee, functions and services, are cocoa and almonds, rely on animal pollination. Marine and deteriorating worldwide. terrestrial ecosystems are the sole sinks for anthropogenic carbon emissions, with a gross sequestration of 5.6 gigatons of carbon per year (the equivalent of some Nature embodies different concepts for 60 per cent of global anthropogenic emissions). Nature different people, including biodiversity, underpins all dimensions of human health and contributes to ecosystems, Mother Earth, systems of life non-material aspects of quality of life – inspiration and and other analogous concepts. Nature’s learning, physical and psychological experiences, and supporting identities – that are central to quality of life and contributions to people embody different cultural integrity, even if their aggregated value is difficult to concepts, such as ecosystem goods and quantify. Most of nature’s contributions are co-produced services and nature’s gifts. Both nature and with people, but while anthropogenic assets – knowledge nature’s contributions to people are vital for and institutions, technology infrastructure and financial human existence and good quality of life capital – can enhance or partially replace some of those (human well-being, living in harmony with contributions, some are irreplaceable. The diversity of nature maintains humanity’s ability to choose alternatives in the nature, living well in balance and harmony face of an uncertain future.

with Mother Earth, and other analogous concepts). While more food, energy and A2 Nature’s contributions to people are often materials than ever before are now being distributed unequally across space and time and supplied to people in most places, this is among different segments of society. There are increasingly at the expense of nature’s ability often trade-offs in the production and use of nature’s contributions. Benefits and burdens associated to provide such contributions in the future, with co-production and use of nature’s contributions are and frequently undermines nature’s many distributed and experienced differently among social groups, other contributions, which range from water countries and regions. Giving priority to one of nature’s quality regulation to sense of place. The contributions to people, such as food production, can result biosphere, upon which humanity as a whole in ecological changes that reduce other contributions. Some depends, is being altered to an unparalleled of these changes may benefit some people at the expense of others, particularly the most vulnerable, as may changes degree across all spatial scales. Biodiversity in technological and institutional arrangements. For – the diversity within species, between example, although food production today is sufficient to species and of ecosystems – is declining satisfy global needs, approximately 11 per cent of the faster than at any time in human history. world’s population is undernourished, and diet-related disease drives 20 per cent of premature mortality, related both to undernourishment and to obesity.

The great expansion in the production of food, feed, fibre and A1 Nature is essential for human existence and bioenergy has occurred at the cost of many other good quality of life. Most of nature’s contributions contributions of nature to quality of life, including regulation to people are not fully replaceable, and some are of air and water quality, climate regulation and habitat irreplaceable. Nature plays a critical role in providing food provision. Synergies also exist, such as sustainable and feed, energy, medicines and genetic resources and a agricultural practices that enhance soil quality, thereby variety of materials fundamental for people’s physical improving productivity and other ecosystem functions and well-being and for maintaining culture. For example, more services, such as carbon sequestration and water than 2 billion people rely on wood fuel to meet their primary quality regulation. THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES A3 Since 1970, trends in agricultural production, the ocean area is experiencing increasing cumulative fish harvest, bioenergy production and harvest of impacts, and over 85 per cent of wetlands (area) has been materials have increased, but 14 of the 18 lost. While the rate of forest loss has slowed globally since categories of contributions of nature that were 2000, this is distributed unequally. Across much of the highly assessed, mostly regulating and non-material biodiverse tropics, 32 million hectares of primary or contributions, have declined. The value of agricultural recovering forest were lost between 2010 and 2015.

The crop production ($2.6 trillion in 2016) has increased extent of tropical and subtropical forests is increasing within approximately threefold since 1970 and raw timber harvest some countries, and the global extent of temperate and has increased by 45 per cent, reaching some 4 billion cubic boreal forests is increasing. A range of actions – from metres in 2017, with the forestry industry providing about restoration of natural forest to planting of monocultures 13.2 million jobs. However, indicators of regulating – contributes to these increases, but these actions have very contributions, such as soil organic carbon and pollinator different consequences for biodiversity and its contributions diversity, have declined, indicating that gains in material to people. Approximately half the live coral cover on coral contributions are often not sustainable. Currently, land reefs has been lost since the 1870s, with accelerating losses degradation has reduced productivity in 23 per cent of the in recent decades due to climate change exacerbating other global terrestrial area, and between $235 billion and drivers. The average abundance of native species in most $577 billion2 in annual global crop output is at risk as a major terrestrial biomes has fallen by at least 20 per cent, result of pollinator loss. Moreover, loss of coastal habitats potentially affecting ecosystem processes and hence and coral reefs reduces coastal protection, which increases nature’s contributions to people; this decline has mostly the risk from floods and hurricanes to life and property for taken place since 1900 and may be accelerating.

In areas of the 100 million to 300 million people living within coastal high endemism, native biodiversity has often been severely 100-year flood zones. impacted by invasive alien species. Population sizes of wild vertebrate species have tended to decline over the last A4 Nature across most of the globe has now been 50 years on land, in freshwater and in the sea. Global trends significantly altered by multiple human drivers, with in insect populations are not known but rapid declines have the great majority of indicators of ecosystems and been well documented in some places. biodiversity showing rapid decline. Seventy-five per cent of the land surface is significantly altered, 66 per cent of A5 Human actions threaten more species with global extinction now than ever before. An average of 2. Value adjusted to 2015 United States dollars, taking into account inflation only. around 25 per cent of species in assessed animal and plant THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES groups are threatened (Figure SPM.3), suggesting that B. Direct and indirect drivers of around 1 million species already face extinction, many within change have accelerated during decades, unless action is taken to reduce the intensity of the past 50 years. drivers of biodiversity loss.

Without such action, there will be a further acceleration in the global rate of species extinction, which is already at least tens to hundreds of times higher The rate of global change in nature during than it has averaged over the past 10 million years the past 50 years is unprecedented in (Figure SPM.4). human history. The direct drivers of change in nature with the largest global impact A6 Globally, local varieties and breeds of have been (starting with those with most domesticated plants and animals are disappearing. This loss of diversity, including genetic diversity, impact): changes in land and sea use; direct poses a serious risk to global food security by exploitation of organisms; climate change; undermining the resilience of many agricultural pollution; and invasion of alien species. systems to threats such as pests, pathogens and Those five direct drivers result from an array climate change. Fewer and fewer varieties and breeds of of underlying causes – the indirect drivers of plants and animals are being cultivated, raised, traded and change – which are in turn underpinned by maintained around the world, despite many local efforts, which include those by indigenous peoples and local societal values and behaviours that include communities. By 2016, 559 of the 6,190 domesticated production and consumption patterns, breeds of mammals used for food and agriculture (over 9 per human population dynamics and trends, cent) had become extinct and at least 1,000 more are trade, technological innovations and local threatened.

In addition, many crop wild relatives that are through global governance. The rate of important for long-term food security lack effective change in the direct and indirect drivers protection, and the conservation status of wild relatives of domesticated mammals and birds is worsening. Reductions differs among regions and countries. in the diversity of cultivated crops, crop wild relatives and domesticated breeds mean that agroecosystems are less resilient against future climate change, pests and pathogens. B1 For terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems, A7 Biological communities are becoming more land-use change has had the largest relative similar to each other in both managed and negative impact on nature since 1970, followed by unmanaged systems within and across regions. the direct exploitation, in particular This human-caused process leads to losses of local overexploitation, of animals, plants and other biodiversity, including endemic species, ecosystem organisms, mainly via harvesting, logging, hunting functions and nature’s contributions to people. and fishing. In marine ecosystems, direct exploitation of organisms (mainly fishing) has had A8 Human-induced changes are creating the largest relative impact, followed by land-/ conditions for fast biological evolution – so rapid sea-use change. Agricultural expansion is the most that its effects can be seen in only a few years or widespread form of land-use change, with over one third of even more quickly. The consequences can be the terrestrial land surface being used for cropping or animal positive or negative for biodiversity and husbandry.

This expansion, alongside a doubling of urban ecosystems, but can create uncertainty about the area since 1992 and an unprecedented expansion of sustainability of species, ecosystem functions and infrastructure linked to growing population and the delivery of nature’s contributions to people. consumption, has come mostly at the expense of forests Understanding and monitoring these biological evolutionary (largely old-growth tropical forests), wetlands and changes is as important for informed policy decisions as it is grasslands. In freshwater ecosystems, a series of combined in cases of ecological change. Sustainable management threats that include land-use change, including water strategies then can be designed to influence evolutionary extraction, exploitation, pollution, climate change and trajectories so as to protect vulnerable species and reduce invasive species, are prevalent. Human activities have had a the impact of unwanted species (such as weeds, pests or large and widespread impact on the world’s oceans. These pathogens). The widespread declines in geographic include direct exploitation, in particular overexploitation, of distribution and population sizes of many species make fish, shellfish and other organisms, land- and sea-based clear that, although evolutionary adaptation to human- pollution, including from river networks, and land-/sea-use caused drivers can be rapid, it has often not been sufficient change, including coastal development for infrastructure to mitigate them fully. and aquaculture.

THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES B2 Climate change is a direct driver that is 86 per cent of marine turtles, 44 per cent of seabirds and increasingly exacerbating the impact of other 43 per cent of marine mammals. This can affect humans drivers on nature and human well-being. Humans are through food chains. Greenhouse gas emissions, untreated estimated to have caused an observed warming of urban and rural waste, pollutants from industrial, mining and approximately 1.0°C by 2017 relative to pre-industrial levels, agricultural activities, oil spills and toxic dumping have had with average temperatures over the past 30 years rising by strong negative effects on soil, freshwater and marine water 0.2°C per decade. The frequency and intensity of extreme quality and on the global atmosphere. Cumulative records of weather events, and the fires, floods and droughts that they alien species have increased by 40 per cent since 1980, can bring, have increased in the past 50 years, while the associated with increased trade and human population global average sea level has risen by between 16 and 21 cm dynamics and trends. Nearly one fifth of the Earth’s surface since 1900, and at a rate of more than 3 mm per year over is at risk of plant and animal invasions, impacting native the past two decades. These changes have contributed to species, ecosystem functions and nature’s contributions to widespread impacts in many aspects of biodiversity, people, as well as economies and human health.

The rate of including species distribution, phenology, population introduction of new invasive alien species seems higher than dynamics, community structure and ecosystem function. ever before and shows no signs of slowing. According to observational evidence, the effects are accelerating in marine, terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems B4 In the past 50 years, the human population has and are already impacting agriculture, aquaculture, fisheries doubled, the global economy has grown nearly and nature’s contributions to people. The compounding fourfold and global trade has grown tenfold, effects of drivers such as climate change, land-/sea-use together driving up the demand for energy and change, overexploitation of resources, pollution and invasive materials. A variety of economic, political and social factors, alien species are likely to exacerbate the negative impacts including global trade and the spatial decoupling of on nature, as seen in different ecosystems including coral production from consumption, have shifted the economic reefs, the Arctic systems and savannas. and environmental gains and losses of production and consumption, contributing to new economic opportunities, B3 Many types of pollution, as well as invasive but also to impacts on nature and its contributions to people. alien species, are increasing, with negative Levels of consumption of material goods (food, feed, timber impacts for nature. Although global trends are mixed, air, and fibre) vary greatly, and unequal access to material goods water and soil pollution have continued to increase in some can be associated with inequity and may lead to social areas.

Marine plastic pollution in particular has increased conflict. Economic exchange contributes to aggregate tenfold since 1980, affecting at least 267 species, including economic development, yet often is negotiated between THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES actors and institutions of unequal power, which influences the manage significant areas under various property and access distribution of benefits and long-term impacts. Countries at regimes. Among the local indicators developed and used by different levels of development have experienced different indigenous peoples and local communities, 72 per cent levels of deterioration of nature for any given gain in economic show negative trends in nature that underpin local growth. Exclusion, scarcity and/or the unequal distribution of livelihoods and well-being. The areas managed (under nature’s contributions to people may fuel social instability and various types of tenure and access regimes) by indigenous conflict in a complex interaction with other factors. Armed peoples and local communities are facing growing resource conflicts have an impact on ecosystems beyond their extraction, commodity production, mining and transport and destabilizing effects on societies, and a range of indirect energy infrastructure, with various consequences for local impacts, including the displacement of people and activities. livelihoods and health. Some climate change mitigation programmes have had negative impacts on indigenous B5 Economic incentives have generally favoured peoples and local communities. The negative impacts of all expanding economic activity, and often these pressures include continued loss of subsistence and environmental harm, over conservation or traditional livelihoods resulting from ongoing deforestation, restoration.

Incorporating the consideration of the loss of wetlands, mining, the spread of unsustainable multiple values of ecosystem functions and of agriculture, forestry and fishing practices and impacts on nature’s contributions to people into economic health and well-being from pollution and water insecurity. incentives has, in the economy, been shown to These impacts also challenge traditional management, the permit better ecological, economic and social transmission of indigenous and local knowledge, the outcomes. Local, national, regional and global governance potential for sharing of benefits arising from the use of, and initiatives have improved outcomes in this way by supporting the ability of indigenous peoples and local communities to policies, innovation and the elimination of environmentally conserve and sustainably manage, wild and domesticated harmful subsidies, introducing incentives in line with the value biodiversity that are also relevant to broader society. of nature’s contribution to people, increasing sustainable land-/sea-use management and enforcing regulations, among other measures. Harmful economic incentives and C. Goals for conserving and policies associated with unsustainable practices in fisheries, sustainably using nature and aquaculture, agriculture (including fertilizer and pesticide use), livestock management, forestry, mining and energy (including achieving sustainability cannot fossil fuels and biofuels) are often associated with land-/ be met by current trajectories, sea-use change and overexploitation of natural resources, as and goals for 2030 and beyond well as inefficient production and waste management. Vested may only be achieved through interests may oppose the removal of subsidies or the introduction of other policies.

Yet policy reforms to deal with transformative changes4 across such causes of environmental harm offer the potential to economic, social, political and both conserve nature and provide economic benefits, technological factors. including when policies are based on more and better understanding of the multiple values of nature’s contributions. Past and ongoing rapid declines in B6 Nature managed by indigenous peoples and biodiversity, ecosystem functions and many local communities is under increasing pressure. of nature’s contributions to people mean that Nature is generally declining less rapidly in most international societal and environmental indigenous peoples’ land than in other lands, but is goals, such as those embodied in the Aichi nevertheless declining, as is the knowledge of how to manage it. At least a quarter of the global land Biodiversity Targets and the 2030 Agenda area is traditionally owned, managed3, used or for Sustainable Development, will not be occupied by indigenous peoples. These areas include achieved based on current trajectories. approximately 35 per cent of the area that is formally These declines will also undermine other protected, and approximately 35 per cent of all remaining goals, such as those specified in the Paris terrestrial areas with very low human intervention. In Agreement adopted under the United addition, a diverse array of local communities, including farmers, fishers, herders, hunters, ranchers and forest users, Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the 2050 Vision for Biodiversity. 3.

These data sources define land management here as the process of determining the use, development and care of land resources in a manner that fulfils material and non-material cultural needs, including livelihood activities such as hunting, fishing, gathering, resource harvesting, pastoralism 4. A fundamental, system-wide reorganization across technological, economic and small-scale agriculture and horticulture. and social factors, including paradigms, goals and values. THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES The negative trends in biodiversity and relating to nature and the protection of the global ecosystem functions are projected to environment are demonstrably on track to be met. For nearly continue or worsen in many future scenarios one third of the goals of these conventions, there has been in response to indirect drivers such as rapid little or no progress towards them or, instead, movement human population growth, unsustainable away from them. production and consumption and associated C2 Nature is essential for achieving the technological development. In contrast, Sustainable Development Goals.

However, taking scenarios and pathways that explore the into consideration that the Sustainable effects of low-to-moderate population Development Goals are integrated, indivisible, and growth, and transformative changes in the nationally implemented, current negative trends in production and consumption of energy, biodiversity and ecosystems will undermine progress towards 80 per cent (35 out of 44) of the food, feed, fibre and water, sustainable assessed targets of Goals related to poverty, use, equitable sharing of the benefits hunger, health, water, cities, climate, oceans and arising from use and nature-friendly climate land (Sustainable Development Goals 1, 2, 3, 6, 11, adaptation and mitigation will better support 13, 14, and 15). Important positive synergies between the achievement of future societal and nature and the Goals related to education, gender equality, environmental objectives. reducing inequalities and promoting peace and justice (Sustainable Development Goals 4, 5, 10 and 16) were found. Land or resource tenure insecurity, as well as declines in nature, have greater impacts on women and C1 The implementation of policy responses and girls, who are most often negatively impacted. However, the actions to conserve nature and manage it more current focus and wording of the targets of these Goals sustainably has progressed, yielding positive obscures or omits their relationship to nature, thereby outcomes relative to scenarios of no intervention, preventing their assessment here. There is a critical need for but progress is not sufficient to stem the direct and future policy targets, indicators and datasets to more indirect drivers of nature deterioration.

It is explicitly account for aspects of nature and their relevance therefore likely that most of the Aichi Biodiversity to human well-being in order to more effectively track the Targets for 2020 will be missed. Some of the Aichi consequences of trends in nature on the Sustainable Biodiversity Targets will be partially achieved, for example Development Goals. Some pathways chosen to achieve the those related to policy responses, such as the spatial extent Goals related to energy, economic growth, industry and of terrestrial and marine protected areas, the identification infrastructure, and sustainable consumption and production and prioritization of invasive alien species, national (Sustainable Development Goals 7, 8, 9 and 12), as well as biodiversity strategies and action plans, and the Nagoya the targets related to poverty, food security and cities Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and (Sustainable Development Goals 1, 2 and 11), could have Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization to substantial positive or negative impacts on nature and the Convention on Biological Diversity. However, while therefore on the achievement of the other Sustainable protected areas now cover 15 per cent of terrestrial and Development Goals. freshwater environments and 7 per cent of the marine realm, they only partly cover important sites for biodiversity and are C3 Areas of the world projected to experience not yet fully ecologically representative and effectively or significant negative effects from global changes in equitably managed.

There has been significant growth in climate, biodiversity, ecosystem functions and official development assistance in support of the Convention nature’s contributions to people are also home to on Biological Diversity and in funding provided by the Global large concentrations of indigenous peoples and Environment Facility, with biodiversity aid flows reaching many of the world’s poorest communities. Because $8.7 billion annually. However, current resource mobilization of their strong dependency on nature and its contributions from all sources is not sufficient to achieve the Aichi for subsistence, livelihoods and health, those communities Biodiversity Targets. In addition, only one in five of the will be disproportionately hard-hit by those negative strategic objective and goals across six global agreements5 changes. Those negative effects also influence the ability of indigenous peoples and local communities to manage and 5. Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals, conserve wild and domesticated biodiversity and nature’s Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna contributions to people. Indigenous peoples and local and Flora, Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage, International Plant Protection Convention, United Nations communities have been proactively confronting such Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing challenges in partnership with each other and with an array Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, and Convention on Wetlands of International Importance especially as Waterfowl Habitat.

of other stakeholders, through co-management systems THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES and local and regional monitoring networks and by increase the risk of global extinctions. For example, a revitalizing and adapting local management systems. synthesis of many studies estimates that the fraction of Regional and global scenarios lack an explicit consideration species at risk of climate-related extinction is 5 per cent at of the views, perspectives and rights of indigenous peoples 2°C warming and rises to 16 per cent at 4.3°C warming. and local communities, their knowledge and understanding Coral reefs are particularly vulnerable to climate change of large regions and ecosystems, and their desired future and are projected to decline to 10 to 30 per cent of former development pathways. cover at 1.5°C warming and to less than 1 per cent of former cover at 2°C warming. Therefore, scenarios show C4 Except in scenarios that include transformative that limiting global warming to well below 2°C plays a change, negative trends in nature, in ecosystem critical role in reducing adverse impacts on nature and its functions and in many of nature’s contributions to contributions to people. people are projected to continue to 2050 and beyond, due to the projected impacts of increasing land-/and sea-use change, exploitation of D. Nature can be conserved, organisms and climate change. Negative impacts restored and used sustainably arising from pollution and invasive alien species will likely exacerbate these trends.

There are large regional differences while other global societal goals in the projected patterns of future biodiversity and are simultaneously met through ecosystem functions and in the losses and changes in urgent and concerted efforts nature’s contributions to people. These differences arise fostering transformative change. from the direct and indirect drivers of change, which are projected to impact regions in different ways. While regions worldwide face further declines in biodiversity in future Societal goals, including those related projections, tropical regions face particular combined risks to food, water, energy, health and the of declines due to the interactions between climate change, achievement of human well-being for all, land-use change and fisheries exploitation. Marine and mitigating and adapting to climate change terrestrial biodiversity in boreal, subpolar and polar regions is projected to decline mostly because of warming, sea ice and conserving and sustainably using retreat and enhanced ocean acidification. The magnitude of nature, can be achieved in sustainable the impacts and the differences between regions are much pathways through the rapid and improved greater in scenarios with rapid increases in consumption or deployment of existing policy instruments human population than in scenarios based on sustainability. and new initiatives that more effectively Acting immediately and simultaneously on the multiple enlist individual and collective action for indirect and direct drivers has the potential to slow, halt and even reverse some aspects of biodiversity and transformative change. Since current ecosystem loss.

structures often inhibit sustainable development and actually represent the C5 Climate change is projected to become indirect drivers of biodiversity loss, such increasingly important as a direct driver of fundamental, structural change is called changes in nature and its contributions to people for. By its very nature, transformative in the next decades. Scenarios show that meeting the Sustainable Development Goals and the 2050 change can expect opposition from those Vision for Biodiversity depends on taking into with interests vested in the status quo, account climate change impacts in the definition but such opposition can be overcome of future goals and objectives. The future impacts of for the broader public good. If obstacles climate change are projected to become more pronounced are overcome, a commitment to mutually in the next decades, with variable relative effects supportive international goals and targets, depending on scenario and geographic region. Scenarios project mostly adverse climate change effects on supporting actions by indigenous peoples biodiversity and ecosystem functioning, which worsen, in and local communities at the local level, new some cases exponentially, with incremental global frameworks for private sector investment warming. Even for global warming of 1.5°C to 2°C, the and innovation, inclusive and adaptive majority of terrestrial species ranges are projected to shrink governance approaches and arrangements, dramatically.

Changes in ranges can adversely affect the multi-sectoral planning, and strategic policy capacity of terrestrial protected areas to conserve species, greatly increase local species turnover and substantially mixes can help to transform the public and THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES private sectors to achieve sustainability at (5) justice and inclusion in conservation; the local, national and global levels. (6) externalities and telecouplings; (7) technology, innovation and investment; and (8) education and knowledge generation and sharing. Specifically, the following changes are mutually reinforcing: (1) enabling D1 The global environment can be safeguarded visions of a good quality of life that do not entail ever- through enhanced international cooperation and increasing material consumption; (2) lowering total linked, locally relevant measures. The review and consumption and waste, including by addressing both renewal of internationally agreed environment- population growth and per capita consumption differently in related goals and targets, based on the best different contexts; (3) unleashing existing, widely-held values available scientific knowledge and the widespread of responsibility to effect new social norms for sustainability, adoption and funding of action on conservation, especially by extending notions of responsibility to include ecological restoration and sustainable use by all the impacts associated with consumption; (4) addressing actors, including individuals, are key to this inequalities, especially regarding income and gender, which safeguarding.

Such widespread adoption implies undermine the capacity for sustainability; (5) ensuring advancing and aligning local, national and international inclusive decision-making and the fair and equitable sharing sustainability efforts and mainstreaming biodiversity and of benefits arising from the use of and adherence to human sustainability across all extractive and productive sectors, rights in conservation decisions; (6) accounting for nature including mining, fisheries, forestry and agriculture, so that deterioration from local economic activities and together, individual and collective actions result in a reversal socioeconomic and environmental interactions over of the deterioration of ecosystem services at the global level. distances (telecouplings), including, for example, Yet these bold changes to the direct drivers of the international trade; (7) ensuring environmentally friendly deterioration of nature cannot be achieved without technological and social innovation, taking into account transformative change that simultaneously addresses the potential rebound effects and investment regimes; and indirect drivers. (8) promoting education, knowledge generation and the maintenance of different knowledge systems, including in D2 Five main interventions (“levers”) can the sciences and indigenous and local knowledge, regarding generate transformative change by tackling the nature, conservation and its sustainable use. underlying indirect drivers of the deterioration of nature: (1) incentives and capacity-building; D4 The character and trajectories of (2) cross-sectoral cooperation; (3) pre-emptive transformation will vary across contexts, with action; (4) decision-making in the context of challenges and needs differing, among others, in resilience and uncertainty; and (5) environmental developing and developed countries. Risks related law and implementation.

Using these levers will involve to the inevitable uncertainties and complexities in the following: (1) developing incentives and widespread transformations towards sustainability can be capacity for environmental responsibility and eliminating reduced through governance approaches that are perverse incentives; (2) reforming sectoral and segmented integrative, inclusive, informed and adaptive. Such decision-making to promote integration across sectors and approaches typically take into account the synergies and jurisdictions; (3) taking pre-emptive and precautionary trade-offs between societal goals and alternative pathways actions in regulatory and management institutions and and recognize a plurality of values, diverse economic businesses to avoid, mitigate and remedy the deterioration conditions, inequity, power imbalances and vested interests of nature, and monitoring their outcomes; (4) managing for in society. Risk-reducing strategies typically include learning resilient social and ecological systems in the face of from experience that is based on a combination of uncertainty and complexity, to deliver decisions that are precautionary measures and existing and emerging robust in a wide range of scenarios; and (5) strengthening knowledge. These approaches involve stakeholders in the environmental laws and policies and their implementation, coordination of policies across sectors and in the creation of and the rule of law more generally. All five levers may require strategic, locally relevant mixes of successful policy new resources, particularly in low-capacity contexts, such instruments. The private sector can play a role in partnership as in many developing countries.

with other actors, including national and subnational governments and civil society; for example, public-private D3 Transformations towards sustainability are partnerships in the water sector have been an important more likely when efforts are directed at the vehicle for financing investments to meet the Sustainable following key leverage points, where efforts yield Development Goals. Some effective policy measures include exceptionally large effects (Figure SPM.9): the expansion and strengthening of ecologically (1) visions of a good life; (2) total consumption and representative, well-connected protected-area networks and waste; (3) values and action; (4) inequalities; of other effective area-based conservation measures; the THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES protection of watersheds; and incentives and sanctions to example, ecosystem-based approaches to fisheries reduce pollution (Table SPM.1). management, spatial planning, effective quotas, marine protected areas, protecting and managing key marine D5 Recognizing the knowledge, innovations, biodiversity areas, reducing run-off pollution into oceans and practices, institutions and values of indigenous working closely with producers and consumers (Table peoples and local communities, and ensuring their SPM.1). It is important to enhance capacity-building for the inclusion and participation in environmental adoption of best fisheries management practices; adopt governance, often enhances their quality of life and measures to promote conservation financing and corporate the conservation, restoration and sustainable use social responsibility; develop new legal and binding of nature, which is relevant to broader society.

instruments; implement and enforce global agreements for Governance, including customary institutions and responsible fisheries; and urgently take all steps necessary management systems and co-management regimes to prevent, deter and eliminate illegal, unreported and that involve indigenous peoples and local unregulated fishing. communities, can be an effective way to safeguard nature and its contributions to people by D8 Land-based climate change mitigation incorporating locally attuned management systems activities can be effective and support and indigenous and local knowledge. The positive conservation goals (Table SPM.1). However, the contributions of indigenous peoples and local communities large-scale deployment of bioenergy plantations to sustainability can be facilitated through national and afforestation of non-forest ecosystems can recognition of land tenure, access and resource rights in come with negative side effects for biodiversity accordance with national legislation, the application of free, and ecosystem functions. Nature-based solutions with prior and informed consent, and improved collaboration, fair safeguards are estimated to provide 37 per cent of climate and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the use, and change mitigation until 2030 needed to meet the goal of co-management arrangements with local communities. keeping climate warming below 2°C, with likely co-benefits for biodiversity. Therefore, land-use actions are D6 Feeding humanity and enhancing the indispensable, in addition to strong actions to reduce conservation and sustainable use of nature are greenhouse gas emissions from fossil fuel use and other complementary and closely interdependent goals industrial and agricultural activities.

However, the large- that can be advanced through sustainable scale deployment of intensive bioenergy plantations, agriculture, aquaculture and livestock systems, the including monocultures, replacing natural forests and safeguarding of native species, varieties, breeds subsistence farmlands, will likely have negative impacts on and habitats, and ecological restoration. Specific biodiversity and can threaten food and water security as actions include promoting sustainable agricultural and well as local livelihoods, including by intensifying agroecological practices, such as multifunctional landscape social conflict. planning and cross-sectoral integrated management, that support the conservation of genetic diversity and the D9 Nature-based solutions can be cost-effective associated agricultural biodiversity. Further actions to for meeting the Sustainable Development Goals in simultaneously achieve food security, biodiversity protection cities, which are crucial for global sustainability. and sustainable use are context appropriate climate change Increased use of green infrastructure and other ecosystem- mitigation and adaptation; incorporating knowledge from based approaches can help to advance sustainable urban various systems, including the sciences and sustainable development while reinforcing climate mitigation and indigenous and local practices; avoiding food waste; adaptation. Urban key biodiversity areas should be empowering producers and consumers to transform supply safeguarded. Solutions can include retrofitting green and chains; and facilitating sustainable and healthy dietary blue infrastructure, such as creating and maintaining green choices.

As part of integrated landscape planning and spaces and biodiversity-friendly water bodies, urban management, prompt ecological restoration, emphasizing agriculture, rooftop gardens and expanded and accessible the use of native species, can offset the current degradation vegetation cover in existing urban and peri-urban areas and and save many endangered species, but is less effective new developments. Green infrastructure in urban and if delayed. surrounding rural areas can complement large-scale “grey infrastructure” in areas such as flood protection, temperature D7 Sustaining and conserving fisheries and regulation, cleaning of air and water, treating wastewater marine species and ecosystems can be achieved and the provision of energy, locally sourced food and the through a coordinated mix of interventions on land, health benefits of interaction with nature. in freshwater and in the oceans, including multilevel coordination across stakeholders on the D 10 A key component of sustainable pathways is use of open oceans. Specific actions could include, for the evolution of global financial and economic THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES systems to build a global sustainable economy, steering away from the current, limited paradigm of economic growth. That implies incorporating the reduction of inequalities into development pathways, reducing overconsumption and waste and addressing environmental impacts, such as externalities of economic activities, from the local to the global scales.

Such an evolution could be enabled through a mix of policies and tools (such as incentive programmes, certification and performance standards) and through more internationally consistent taxation, supported by multilateral agreements and enhanced environmental monitoring and evaluation. It would also entail a shift beyond standard economic indicators such as gross domestic product to include those able to capture more holistic, long-term views of economics and quality of life. THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES A. Nature and its vital contributions to people, which together embody biodiversity and ecosystem functions and services, are deteriorating worldwide. 1 Nature underpins quality of life by providing Development Goal 3)}. Nature is the origin of most infectious basic life support for humanity (regulating), as well diseases (negative impact), but also the source of medicines as material goods (material) and spiritual inspiration and antibiotics for treatment (positive contribution) (well (non-material) (well established) {2.3.1, 2.3.2}. Most established). Zoonotic diseases are significant threats to of nature’s contributions to people (NCP) are human health, with vector-borne diseases accounting for co-produced by biophysical processes and approximately 17 per cent of all infectious diseases and ecological interactions with anthropogenic assets causing an estimated 700,000 deaths globally per annum such as knowledge, infrastructure, financial capital, (established but incomplete) {3.3.2.2}.

Emerging infectious technology and the institutions that mediate them diseases in wildlife, domestic animals, plants or people can be (well established) {2.3.2} (Appendix I). For example, exacerbated by human activities such as land clearing and marine and freshwater-based food is co-produced by the habitat fragmentation (established but incomplete) or the combination of fish populations, fishing gear, and access to overuse of antibiotics driving rapid evolution of antibiotic fishing grounds {2.3.3} There is unequal access to nature’s resistance in many bacterial pathogens (well established) contributions and unequal impact of nature’s contributions {3.3.2.2}. The deterioration of nature and consequent on different social groups (established but incomplete) disruption of benefits to people has both direct and indirect {2.3.5}. Furthermore, increases in the production of some of implications for public health (well established) {2.3.5.2} and nature’s contributions cause declines in others (Figure can exacerbate existing inequalities in access to health care or SPM.1) {2.3.2, 2.3.5}, which also affects people differently healthy diets (established but incomplete) {2.3.4.2}. Shifting (well established). For example, clearing of forest for diets towards a diversity of foods, including fish, fruit, nuts agriculture has increased the supply of food, feed, (NCP 12) and vegetables, significantly reduces the risk of certain and other materials important for people (such as natural preventable non-communicable diseases, which are fibres and ornamental flowers: NCP 13), but has reduced currently responsible for 20 per cent of premature mortality contributions as diverse as pollination (NCP 2), climate globally (well established) {2.3.4.2, 2.3.5.2 (NCP 2 and 12)}.

regulation (NCP 4), water quality regulation (NCP 7), opportunities for learning and inspiration (NCP 15) and the 3 Most of nature’s contributions are not fully maintenance of options for the future (NCP 18). However, replaceable, yet some contributions of nature are very few large-scale systematic studies exist on those irreplaceable (well established). Loss of diversity, such relationships {2.3.2}. Land degradation has reduced as phylogenetic and functional diversity, can permanently productivity in 23 per cent of the global terrestrial area, and reduce future options, such as wild species that might be between $235 billion and $577 billion in annual global crop domesticated as new crops and be used for genetic output is at risk as a result of pollinator loss {2.3.5.3} improvement {2.3.5.3}. People have created substitutes for (established but incomplete). some other contributions of nature, but many of them are imperfect or financially prohibitive {2.3.2.2}. For example, 2 Many of nature’s contributions to people are high-quality drinking water can be realized either through essential for human health (well established) and their ecosystems that filter pollutants or through human- decline thus threatens a good quality of life engineered water treatment facilities {2.3.5.3}. Similarly, (established but incomplete) {2.3.4}. Nature provides a coastal flooding from storm surges can be reduced either by broad diversity of nutritious foods, medicines and clean coastal mangroves or by dikes and sea walls {2.3.5.3}.

In water (well established) {2.3.5.2, 3.3.2.1, 3.3.2.2 both cases, however, built infrastructure can be extremely (Sustainable Development Goal 3)}; can help to regulate expensive, incur high future costs and fail to provide disease and the immune system {2.3.4.2}; can reduce levels synergistic benefits such as nursery habitats for edible fish of certain air pollutants (established but incomplete) {2.3.4.2, or recreational opportunities {2.3.5.2}. More generally, 3.3.2.2}; and can improve mental and physical health human-made replacements often do not provide the full through exposure to natural areas (inconclusive), among range of benefits provided by nature {2.3.2.2} other contributions {2.3.2.2, 2.3.4.2, 3.3.2.2 (Sustainable (Figure SPM.1).

THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES Directional trend Nature’s contribution to people 50-year global trend across regions • Extent of suitable habitat 1 Habitat creation and maintenance • Biodiversity intactness 2 Pollination and dispersal • Pollinator diversity of seeds and other propagules • Retention and prevented emissions of 3 Regulation of air quality air pollutants by ecosystems • Prevented emissions and uptake of 4 Regulation of climate greenhouse gases by ecosystems 5 Regulation of ocean acidification 6 Regulation of freshwater • Ecosystem impact on quantity, location and timing air-surface-ground water partitioning 7 Regulation of freshwater • Extent of ecosystems that filter or add and coastal water quality constituent components to water 8 Formation, protection and decontamination of soils • Soil organic carbon and sediments 9 Regulation of hazards and • Ability of ecosystems to absorb and extreme events buffer hazards • Extent of natural habitat in agricultural 10 Regulation of detrimental areas organisms and biological processes • Diversity of competent hosts of vector-borne diseases • Extent of agricultural land—potential 11 Energy land for bioenergy production • Extent of forested land • Extent of agricultural land—potential 12 Food and feed land for food and feed production • Abundance of marine fish stocks • Extent of agricultural land—potential 13 Materials and assistance land for material production • Extent of forested land • Fraction of species locally known and 14 Medicinal, biochemical used medicinally and genetic resources • Phylogenetic diversity • Number of people in close proximity to nature 15 Learning and inspiration • Diversity of life from which to learn !?

16 Physical and psychological • Area of natural and traditional experiences landscapes and seascapes 17 Supporting identities • Stability of land use and land cover • Species’ survival probability 18 Maintenance of options • Phylogenetic diversity Well established DIRECTIONAL LEVELS OF Established but incomplete Variable Unresolved Selected indicator • Extent of natural habitat in agricultural areas • Capacity to sequester carbon by marine and terrestrial environments Decrease Increase Global trends: Across regions: Consistent Figure SPM 1 G lobal trends in the capacity of nature to sustain contributions to good quality of life from 1970 to the present, which show a decline for 14 of the 18 categories of nature’s contributions to people analysed. Data supporting global trends and regional variations come from a systematic review of over 2,000 studies {2.3.5.1}. Indicators were selected on the basis of availability of global data, prior use in assessments and alignment with 18 categories. For many categories of nature’s contributions, two indicators are included that show different aspects of nature’s capacity to contribute to human well-being within that category. Indicators are defined so that an increase in the indicator is associated with an improvement in nature’s contributions. THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES 4 Humanity is a dominant global influence on life species that live there, from storms, as well as their ability to on earth, and has caused natural terrestrial, provide sustainable livelihoods (well established) {2.2.5.2.1, freshwater and marine ecosystems to decline (well 2.3.5.2}.

Severe impacts to ocean ecosystems are established) {2.2.5.2} (Figure SPM.2). Global indicators of illustrated by 33 per cent of fish stocks being classified as ecosystem extent and condition have shown a decrease by overexploited and greater than 55 per cent of ocean area an average of 47 per cent of their estimated natural being subject to industrial fishing (established but baselines, with many continuing to decline by at least 4 per incomplete) {2.1.11.1, 2.2.5.2.4, 2.2.7.16}. cent per decade (established but incomplete) {2.2.5.2.1}. On land, particularly sensitive ecosystems include old- 6 The global rate of species extinction is already at growth forests, insular ecosystems, and wetlands; and only least tens to hundreds of times higher than the around 25 per cent of land is sufficiently unimpacted that average rate over the past 10 million years and is ecological and evolutionary processes still operate with accelerating (established but incomplete) {2.2.5.2.4} minimal human intervention (established but incomplete) (Figure SPM.3). Human actions have already driven at least {2.2.3.4.1, 2.2.5.2.1}. In terrestrial “hotspots” of endemic 680 vertebrate species to extinction since 1500, including species, natural habitats have generally undergone greater the Pinta Giant Tortoise in the Galapagos in 2012, even reductions to date in extent and condition, and tend to be though successful conservation efforts have saved from experiencing more rapid ongoing decline, on average than extinction at least 26 bird species and 6 ungulate species, other terrestrial regions {2.2.5.2.1}. Globally, the net rate of including the Arabian Oryx and Przewalski’s Horse {3.2.1}.

forest loss has halved since the 1990s, largely because of The threat of extinction is also accelerating: in the best- net increases in temperate and high latitude forests; studied taxonomic groups, most of the total extinction risk high-biodiversity tropical forests continue to dwindle, and to species is estimated to have arisen in the past 40 years global forest area is now approximately 68 per cent of the (established but incomplete) {2.2.5.2.4}. The proportion of estimated pre-industrial level (established but incomplete) species currently threatened with extinction according to the {2.2.5.2.1}. Forests and natural mosaics sufficiently International Union for the Conservation of Nature’s Red List undamaged to be classed as “intact” (defined as being criteria averages around 25 per cent across the many larger than 500 km2 where satellites can detect no human terrestrial, freshwater and marine vertebrate, invertebrate pressure) were reduced by 7 per cent (919, 000 km2) and plant groups that have been studied in sufficient detail between 2000 and 2013, shrinking in both developed and to support a robust overall estimate (established but developing countries {2.2.5.2.1}. Inland waters and incomplete) {2.2.5.2.4, 3.2}. More than 40 per cent of freshwater ecosystems show among the highest rates of amphibian species, almost a third of reef-forming corals, decline. Only 13 per cent of the wetland present in 1700 sharks and shark relatives and over a third of marine remained by 2000; recent losses have been even more mammals are currently threatened {2.2.5.2.4, 3}.

The rapid (0.8 per cent per year from 1970 to 2008) (established proportion of insect species threatened with extinction is a but incomplete) {2.2.7.9}. key uncertainty, but available evidence supports a tentative estimate of 10 per cent (established but incomplete) 5 Marine ecosystems, from coastal to deep sea, {2.2.5.2.4}. Those proportions suggest that, of an estimated now show the influence of human actions, with 8 million animal and plant species (75 per cent of which are coastal marine ecosystems showing both large insects), around 1 million are threatened with extinction historical losses of extent and condition as well as (established but incomplete) {2.2.5.2.4}. A similar picture rapid ongoing declines (established but incomplete) also emerges from an entirely separate line of evidence. {2.2.5.2.1, 2.2.7.15} (Figure SPM.2). Over 40 per cent of Habitat loss and deterioration, largely caused by human ocean area was strongly affected by multiple drivers in 2008, actions, have reduced global terrestrial habitat integrity by and 66 per cent was experiencing increasing cumulative 30 per cent relative to an unimpacted baseline; combining impacts in 2014. Only 3 per cent of the ocean was that with the longstanding relationship between habitat area described as free from human pressure in 2014 (established and species numbers suggests that around 9 per cent of but incomplete) {2.2.5.2.1, 3.2.1}.

Seagrass meadows the world’s estimated 5.9 million terrestrial species – more decreased in extent by over 10 per cent per decade from than 500,000 species – have insufficient habitat for 1970 to 2000 (established but incomplete) {2.2.5.2.1}. Live long-term survival, and are committed to extinction, many coral cover on reefs has nearly halved in the past 150 years, within decades, unless their habitats are restored the decline dramatically accelerating over the past two or (established but incomplete) {2.2.5.2.4}. Population declines three decades due to increased water temperature and often give warning that a species’ risk of extinction is ocean acidification interacting with and further exacerbating increasing. The Living Planet Index, which synthesises other drivers of loss (well established) {2.2.5.2.1}. These trends in vertebrate populations, shows that species have coastal marine ecosystems are among the most productive declined rapidly since 1970, with reductions of 40 per cent systems globally, and their loss and deterioration reduce for terrestrial species, 84 per cent for freshwater species their ability to protect shorelines, and the people and and 35 per cent for marine species (established but THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES EXAMPLES OF DECLINES IN NATURE ECOSYSTEM EXTENT AND CONDITION 47% Natural ecosystems have declined by 47 per cent on average, relative to their earliest estimated states. Demographic SPECIES EXTINCTION RISK and sociocultural 25% Approximately 25 per cent of species are already threatened with extinction in Terrestrial most animal and plant groups studied.

Economic and ECOLOGICAL COMMUNITIES technological 23% Biotic integrity—the abundance of naturally- Freshwater present species—has declined by 23 per cent on average in terrestrial communities.* Institutions and governance BIOMASS AND SPECIES ABUNDANCE Marine The global biomass of wild mammals has 82% fallen by 82 per cent.* Indicators of Conflicts 0 20 40 60 80 100% vertebrate abundance have declined and rapidly since 1970 epidemics Land/sea use change Direct exploitation NATURE FOR INDIGENOUS PEOPLES Climate change Pollution Invasive alien species 72% 72 per cent of indicators developed by Others indigenous peoples and local communities show ongoing deterioration of elements of nature important to them * Since prehistory Figure SPM 2 E xamples of global declines in nature, emphasizing declines in biodiversity, that have been and are being caused by direct and indirect drivers of change. The direct drivers (land-/sea-use change; direct exploitation of organisms; climate change; pollution; and invasive alien species)6 result from an array of underlying societal causes7. These causes can be demographic (e.g., human population dynamics), sociocultural (e.g., consumption patterns), economic (e.g., trade), technological, or relating to institutions, governance, conflicts and epidemics. They are called indirect drivers8 and are underpinned by societal values and behaviours. The colour bands represent the relative global impact of direct drivers, from top to bottom, on terrestrial, freshwater and marine nature, as estimated from a global systematic review of studies published since 2005.

Land- and sea-use change and direct exploitation account for more than 50 per cent of the global impact on land, in fresh water and in the sea, but each driver is dominant in certain contexts {2.2.6}. The circles illustrate the magnitude of the negative human impacts on a diverse selection of aspects of nature over a range of different time scales based on a global synthesis of indicators {2.2.5, 2.2.7}. incomplete) {2.2.5.2.4}. Local declines of insect populations use change, knowledge loss, market preferences and such as wild bees and butterflies have often been reported, large-scale trade (well established) {2.2.5.2.6, and insect abundance has declined very rapidly in some 2.2.5.3.1}. Domestic varieties of plants and animals are the places even without large-scale land-use change, but the result of natural and human-managed selection, global extent of such declines is not known (established but sometimes over centuries or millennia, and tend to show a incomplete) {2.2.5.2.4}. On land, wild species that are high degree of adaptation (genotypic and phenotypic) to endemic (narrowly distributed) have typically seen larger- local conditions (well established) {2.2.4.4}. As a result, the than-average changes to their habitats and shown faster- pool of genetic variation which underpins food security has than-average declines (established but incomplete) declined (well established) {2.2.5.2.6}. Ten per cent of {2.2.5.2.3, 2.2.5.2.4}.6 7 8 domesticated breeds of mammals were recorded as extinct, as well as some 3.5 per cent of domesticated 7 The number of local varieties and breeds of breeds of birds (well established) {2.2.5.2.6}.

Many domesticated plants and animals and their wild hotspots of agrobiodiversity and crop wild relatives are also relatives has been reduced sharply as a result of land under threat or not formally protected. The conservation status of wild relatives of domesticated livestock has also deteriorated. These wild relatives represent critical 6. The classification of direct drivers used throughout this assessment is in {2.1.12 - 2.1.17}. reservoirs of genes and traits that may provide resilience 7. The interactions among indirect and direct drivers are addressed in {2.1.11, against future climate change, pests and pathogens and 2.1.18}. may improve current heavily depleted gene pools of many 8. The classification of indirect drivers used throughout this assessment is in {2.1.3 - 2.1.10}. crops and domestic animals {2.2.3.4.3}.

The lands of sruoivaheb dna seulaV THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES Current global extinction risk in different species groups Estimate of percentage threatened Total number of extant assessed species Bony fishes*** 2,390 Gastropods*** 633 Birds* 10,966 Data Deficient 1,520 972 Non-threatened 1,026 Least Concern Reptiles** 1,500 Near Threatened Mammals* 5,593 Threatened Crustaceans*** 2,872 Vulnerable Sharks and rays* 1,091 Endangered Corals (reef-forming)* 845 Critically Endangered Conifers* 607 Dicots*** 1,781 Extinct in the Wild Amphibians* 6,576 Cycads* 307 * Comprehensive 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 ** Sampled *** Selected PERCENTAGE OF SPECIES IN EACH CATEGORY 2.5 Amphibians 2.0 Mammals 1.5 Birds 1.0 Reptiles Fishes 0.5 Figure SPM 3 A substantial proportion of assessed species are threatened with extinction and overall trends are deteriorating, with extinction rates increasing sharply in the past century. A Percentage of species threatened with extinction in taxonomic groups that have been assessed comprehensively, or through a ‘sampled’ approach, or for which selected subsets have been assessed, by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of Threatened Species. Groups are ordered according to the best estimate for the percentage of extant species considered threatened (shown by the vertical blue lines), assuming that data deficient species are as threatened as non-data deficient species. B Extinctions since 1500 for vertebrate groups. Rates for reptiles and fishes have not been assessed for all species.

C Red List Index of species survival for taxonomic groups that have been assessed for the IUCN Red List at least twice. A value of 1 is equivalent to all species being categorized as Least Concern; a value of zero is equivalent to all species being classified as Extinct. Data for all panels derive from www.iucnredlist.org (see Chapter 3 Figure 3.4 and Chapter 2 Figure 2.7). indigenous peoples and local communities, including suggest that genetic diversity within wild species globally farmers, pastoralists and herders, are often important has been declining by about 1 per cent per decade since areas for in situ conservation of the remaining varieties and the mid-19th century; and genetic diversity within wild breeds (well established) {2.2.5.3.1}. Available data mammals and amphibians tends to be lower in areas tcnitxe nevird seiceps fo % evitalumuC lavivrus seiceps fo xedni tsil deR IUCN Red List categories Dragonflies** Ferns and relatives** Monocots** B Extinctions since 1500 C Declines in species survival since 1980 (Red List Index) 1.0 Worse Cumulative % of species based on Better Corals on background rate of 0.1-2 extinctions per million species per year Birds 0.9 Mammals 0.8 Amphibians 0.7 0.6 Cycads Better Worse 0.5 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900 2018 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 Greater extinction risk THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES where human influence is greater (established but 9 Many organisms show ongoing biological incomplete) {2.2.5.2.6}.

evolution so rapid that it is detectable within only a few years or even more quickly – in response to 8 Human-driven changes in species diversity anthropogenic drivers (well established) {2.2.5.2.5, within local ecological communities vary widely, 2.2.5.2.6}. Management decisions that take those depending on the net balance between species evolutionary changes into account will be noticeably loss and the influx of alien species, disturbance- more effective (established but incomplete) {Box 2.5}. tolerant species, other human-adapted species or This human-driven contemporary evolution, which has long climate migrant species (well established) {2.2.5.2.3}. been recognized in microbes, viruses, agricultural insect Even though human-dominated landscapes are sometimes pests and weeds (well established), is now being observed species-rich, their species composition is markedly altered in some species within all major taxonomic groups from that in natural landscapes (well established) {2.2.5.2.3, (animals, plants, fungi and microorganisms). Such changes 2.2.7.10, 2.2.7.11}. As a result of human-caused changes are known to occur in response to human activities or in community composition, naturally occurring species in drivers, such as hunting, fishing, harvesting, climate local terrestrial ecosystems worldwide are estimated to change, ocean acidification, soil and water pollution, have lost at least 20 per cent of their original abundance on invasive species, pathogens, pesticides and urbanization average, with hotspots of endemic species tending to have (established but incomplete) {2.2.5.2.5}. However, lost even more (established but incomplete) {2.2.5.2.3}.

The management strategies typically assume that evolutionary traits of species influence whether they persist or even changes occur only over much longer time periods and thrive in human-modified ecosystems (well established) thus ignore rapid evolution. These policy considerations {2.2.3.6, 2.2.5.2.5}. For example, species that are large, span many spheres in which management actions grow slowly, are habitat specialists or are carnivores – such designed to slow or speed evolution can dramatically as great apes, tropical hardwood trees, sharks and big cats change outcomes, as the following examples indicate. – are disappearing from many areas. Many other species, Insects, weeds and pathogens evolve resistance to including those with opposite characteristics, are becoming insecticides, herbicides and other control agents, yet more abundant locally and are spreading quickly around the management strategies such as refuges, crop rotation, and world; across a set of 21 countries with detailed records, crop diversity can dramatically slow that undesirable the numbers of invasive alien species per country have evolution (well established) {Box 2.5}. Commercial fish risen by some 70 per cent since 1970 {2.2.5.2.3}. The populations have evolved to mature earlier under intensive effects of invasive alien species are often particularly severe harvesting, which sometimes can be minimized by for the native species and assemblages on islands and in mandating changes in fishing gear or fish size limits other settings with high proportions of endemic species (established but incomplete) {2.2.5.2.5}. Climate change (well established) {2.2.3.4.1, 2.2.5.2.3}.

Invasive alien favours the evolution of seasonally earlier reproduction in species can have devastating effects on mainland many organisms, which can in principle be facilitated assemblages as well: for example, a single invasive through the introduction of individuals from populations pathogen species, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis, is a already adapted to such conditions (established but threat to nearly 400 amphibian species worldwide and has incomplete) {2.2.5.2.5}. Mosquitoes rapidly evolve already caused a number of extinctions (well established) resistance to efforts to control them, but evolutionarily {2.2.5.2.3}. Many drivers add already widespread species informed management actions can dramatically slow that to ecological communities in many places; and many undesirable evolution (established but incomplete) drivers cause endemic species to decline in many places. {2.2.5.2.5}. Contemporary evolution is thus relevant to These two processes have contributed to the widespread many policy concerns. Understanding and working with erosion of differences between ecological communities in contemporary evolution can address important concerns different places, a phenomenon known as biotic surrounding pollination and dispersal, coral persistence in homogenization or the “anthropogenic blender” (well the face of ocean acidification, water quality, pest established) {2.2.5.2.3}. The consequences of all these regulation, food production and options for the future changes for ecosystem processes and hence nature’s (established but incomplete). The specific actions taken will contributions to people can be very significant. For typically be case-specific and therefore will require careful example, the decline and disappearance of large herbivores assessment of evolutionary potential and consequences.

In and predators has dramatically affected the structure, fire many cases, the best strategy could be to simply maintain regimes, seed dispersal, land surface albedo and nutrient the ability of natural populations to respond evolutionarily availability within many ecosystems (well established) on their own – rather than through direct human {2.2.5.2.1}. However, the consequences of changes often manipulation of evolution. depend on details of the ecosystem, remain hard to predict and are still understudied (established but incomplete) {2.2.5.2.3}. THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES B. Direct and indirect drivers of change have accelerated during the past 50 years. 10 Today, humans extract more from the Earth and available freshwater resources are devoted to crop or produce more waste than ever before (well livestock production {2.1.11}. Crop production occurs on established). Globally, land-use change is the direct some 12 per cent of total ice-free land. Grazing occurs on driver with the largest relative impact on terrestrial about 25 per cent of total ice-free lands and approximately and freshwater ecosystems, while direct exploitation 70 per cent of drylands {2.1.11}. Approximately 25 per cent of fish and seafood has the largest relative impact in of the globe’s greenhouse gas emissions come from land the oceans (well established) (Figure SPM.2) {2.2.6.2}. clearing, crop production and fertilization, with animal-based Climate change, pollution and invasive alien species food contributing 75 per cent of that.

Intensive agriculture have had a lower relative impact to date but are has increased food production at the cost of regulating and accelerating (established but incomplete) {2.2.6.2, 3.2, non-material contributions from nature, though 4.2}. Although the pace of agricultural expansion into intact environmentally beneficial practices are increasing. Small ecosystems {2.1.13} has varied from country to country, landholdings (less than 2 hectares) contribute approximately losses of intact ecosystems have occurred primarily in the 30 per cent of global crop production and 30 per cent of the tropics, home to the highest levels of biodiversity on the global food caloric supply, using around a quarter of planet (for example, 100 million hectares of tropical forest agricultural land and usually maintaining rich agrobiodiversity from 1980 to 2000), due to cattle ranching in Latin America {2.1.11}. Moving to logging, between 1990 and 2015, (~42 million ha) and plantations in South-East Asia clearing and wood harvest contributed to a total reduction (~7.5 million hectares, 80 per cent in oil palm) among others of 290 million hectares in native forest cover, while the area {2.1.13}, noting that plantations can also increase total of planted forests grew by 110 million hectares {2.1.11}. forest area. Within land-use change, urban areas have more Industrial roundwood harvest is falling within some than doubled since 1992. In terms of direct exploitation, developed countries but rising on average in developing approximately 60 billion tons9 of renewable and non- countries {2.1.11}.

Illegal timber harvests and related trade renewable resources {2.1.2} are being extracted each year. supply 10–15 per cent of global timber, and up to 50 per That total has nearly doubled since 1980, as population has cent in certain areas, hurting revenues for state owners and grown considerably while the average per capita livelihoods for the rural poor. All mining on land has consumption of materials (e.g., plants, animals, fossil fuels, increased dramatically and, while still using less than 1 per ores, construction material) has risen by 15 per cent since cent of the Earth’s land, has had significant negative impacts 1980 (established but incomplete) {2.1.6, 2.1.11, 2.1.14}. on biodiversity, emissions of highly toxic pollutants, water This activity has generated unprecedented impacts: since quality and water distribution, and human health {2.1.11}. 1980, greenhouse gas emissions have doubled {2.1.11, Mined products contribute more than 60 per cent of the 2.1.12}, raising average global temperatures by at least GDP of 81 countries. There are approximately 17,000 large- 0.7 °C {2.1.12}, while plastic pollution in oceans has scale mining sites in 171 countries, with the legal sites increased tenfold {2.1.15}. Over 80 per cent of global mostly managed by international corporations, but there is wastewater is being discharged back into the environment also extensive illegal and small-scale mining that is harder to without treatment, while 300–400 million tons of heavy trace, and both types of sites are often in locations relevant metals, solvents, toxic sludge and other wastes from for biodiversity {2.1.11}.

industrial facilities are dumped into the world’s waters each year {2.1.15}. Excessive or inappropriate application of 12 In marine systems, fishing has had the most fertilizer can lead to run-off from fields and enter freshwater impact on biodiversity (target species, non-target and coastal ecosystems, producing more than 400 hypoxic species and habitats) in the past 50 years alongside zones that affected a total area of more than 245,000 km2 other significant drivers (well established) {2.1.11, as early as 2008 {2.1.15}. In some island countries, invasive 2.2.6.2} (Figure SPM.2). Global fish catches have been alien species have a significant impact on biodiversity, with sustained by expanding fishing geographically and introduced species being a key driver of extinctions. penetrating into deeper waters (well established) {3.2.1}. An increasing proportion of marine fish stocks are overfished 11 Land-use change is driven primarily by (33 per cent in 2015), including stocks of economically agriculture, forestry and urbanization, all of which are important species, while 60 per cent are maximally associated with air, water and soil pollution. Over one sustainably fished and only 7 per cent are underfished (well third of the world’s land surface and nearly three-quarters of established) {Box 3.1}. Industrial fishing, concentrated in a few countries and corporations {2.1.11}, covers at least 9. All references to “tons” are to metric tons. 55 per cent of the oceans, largely concentrated in the THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES northeast Atlantic, the northwest Pacific and upwelling {2.1.12, 2.1.18, 2.2.6.2}.

Shifts in species distribution, regions off South America and West Africa (established but changes in phenology, altered population dynamics and incomplete) {2.1.11}. Small-scale fisheries account for more changes in the composition of species assemblage or the than 90 per cent of commercial fishers (over 30 million structure and function of ecosystems, are evident {2.2.5.3.2, people), and nearly half of global fish catch (established but 2.2.5.2.3, 2.2.6.2} and accelerating in marine, terrestrial and incomplete). In 2011, illegal, unreported or unregulated freshwater systems (well established) {2.2.3.2}. Almost half fishing represented up to one third of the world’s reported (47 per cent) of threatened terrestrial mammals, excluding catch (established but incomplete) {2.1.11}. Since 1992, bats, and one quarter (23 per cent) of threatened birds may regional fisheries bodies have been adopting sustainable have already been negatively affected by climate change in development principles. For instance, more than at least part of their distribution (birds in North America and 170 members of the Food and Agriculture Organization of Europe suggest effects of climate change in their population the United Nations (FAO) adopted the Code of Conduct for trends since the 1980s) (established but incomplete) Responsible Fisheries in 1995, and as of 1 April 2018, {2.2.6.2}.

Ecosystems such as tundra and taiga and regions 52 countries and one member organization had become such as Greenland, previously little affected by people Parties to the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent, directly, are increasingly experiencing the impacts of climate Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated change (well established) {2.2.7.5}. Large reductions and Fishing, in order to address the depletion of marine fisheries local extinctions of populations are widespread (well (established but incomplete) {2.1.11}, reduce by-catch {3, established) {2.2.6.2}. This indicates that many species are box 3.3} and lower damage to seabeds and reefs. In unable to cope locally with the rapid pace of climate addition, the set of established marine protected areas has change, through either evolutionary or behavioural been growing (well established) {2.1.11.1, 2.2.7.16}. processes, and that their continued existence will also depend on the extent to which they are able to disperse, to 13 The direct driver with the second highest relative track suitable climatic conditions, and to preserve their impact on the oceans is the many changes in the uses capacity to evolve (well established) {2.2.5.2.5}. Many of of the sea and coastal land (well established) (Figure these changes can have significant impacts on a number of SPM.2) {2.2.6.2}. Coastal habitats, including estuaries and important economic sectors, and cascading effects for other deltas critical for marine biota and regional economies, have components of biodiversity.

Island nations, in particular been severely affected by sea-use changes (coastal those in East Asia and the Pacific region, will be most development, offshore aquaculture, mariculture and bottom vulnerable to sea-level rise (1m) as projected by all climate trawling) and land-use changes (onshore land clearance and change scenarios, {2.1.1.7.1} which will displace close to urban sprawl along coastlines, plus pollution of rivers). 40 million people {2.1.1.7.1, 2.2.7.1.8}. Pollution from land sources is already a major driver of negative environmental change. Ocean mining, while 15 Unsustainable use of the Earth’s resources is relatively small, has expanded since 1981 to ~ 6,500 offshore underpinned by a set of demographic and economic oil and gas installations worldwide in 53 countries (60 per indirect drivers that have increased, and that cent in the Gulf of Mexico by 2003) and likely will expand into furthermore interact in complex ways, including the Arctic and Antarctic regions as the ice melts {2.1.11}. through trade (well established) {2.1.6}. The global Ocean acidification from increased carbon dioxide levels human population has increased from 3.7 to 7.6 billion since largely affects shallow waters, with the ecosystems of the 1970 unevenly across countries and regions, which has subarctic Pacific and western Arctic Ocean particularly strong implications for the degradation of nature. Per capita affected. Plastic microparticles and nanoparticles are consumption also has grown, and also is unequal, with wide entering food webs in poorly understood ways {2.1.15.3}.

variations in lifestyles and access to resources across and Coastal waters hold the highest levels of metals and within regions, plus consequences for nature that are persistent organic pollutants from industrial discharge and distributed globally through trade. Total gross domestic agricultural run-off, poisoning coastal fish harvests. Severe product is four times higher and is rising faster in developed effects from excess nutrient concentrations in certain than in least developed countries. Approximately 821 million locations include damage to fish and seabed biota. The people face food insecurity in Asia and Africa, while 40 per dynamics of ocean and airborne transport of pollutants mean cent of the global population lacks access to clean, safe that the harm from inputs of plastics, persistent organic drinking water. Generally, environmentally-based health pollutants, heavy metals and ocean acidification is felt burdens, such as air and water pollution, are more prevalent worldwide, including with consequences for human health. in least developed countries {2.1.2, 2.1.15}. 14 Climate change is already having an impact on 16 Due to expansions of infrastructure, extensive nature, from genes to ecosystems. It poses a growing areas of the planet are being opened up to new risk owing to the accelerated pace of change and threats (well established) {2.1.11}.

Globally, paved road interactions with other direct drivers (well established) lengths are projected to increase by 25 million kilometres by THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES 2050, with nine tenths of all road construction occurring other factors, be a source of conflict within and among within least developed and developing countries. The countries (established but incomplete). Least developed number of dams has increased rapidly in the past 50 years. countries, often rich in and more dependent upon natural Worldwide, there are now about 50,000 large dams (higher resources, have suffered the greatest land degradation, than 15 metres) and approximately 17 million reservoirs have also experienced more conflict and lower economic (larger than 0.01 hectares or 100m2) {2.1.11}. The growth, and have contributed to environmental outmigration expansions of roads, cities, hydroelectric dams and oil and by several million people {2.1.2, 2.1.4}. When indigenous gas pipelines can come with high environmental and social peoples or local communities are expelled from or costs, including deforestation, habitat fragmentation, threatened on their lands, including by mining or industrial biodiversity loss, land grabbing, population displacement logging for export, this too can spark conflict – often and social disruption, including for indigenous peoples and between actors with different levels of power, as today a few local communities (established but incomplete).

Yet actors can control large shares of any market or capital infrastructure can generate positive economic effects and asset rivalling those of most countries {2.1.6}, while funds even environmental gains, based on efficiency, innovation, channelled through tax havens support most vessels migration, and urbanization, depending on where and how implicated in illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing. investment is implemented and governed (well established) More than 2,500 conflicts over fossil fuels, water, food and {2.1.11}. Understanding this variation in impacts is critical. land are currently occurring across the planet, and at least 1,000 environmental activists and journalists were killed 17 Long-distance transportation of goods and between 2002 and 2013 {2.1.11, 2.1.18}. people, including for tourism, have grown dramatically in the past 20 years, with negative consequences for 19 Governance has at many levels moved slowly to nature overall (established but incomplete). The rise in further and better incorporate into policies and airborne and seaborne transportation of both goods and incentives the values of nature’s contributions to people, including a threefold increase in travel from people. However, around the globe, subsidies with developed and developing countries in particular, has harmful effects on nature have persisted (well increased pollution and significantly increased the presence established) {2.1, 3, 5, 6.4}. The incorporation by society of of invasive alien species (well established) {2.1.15}.

Between the value of nature’s contributions to people will entail shifts 2009 and 2013, the carbon footprint from tourism rose in governance even within private supply chains, for instance 40 per cent to 4.5 gigatons of carbon dioxide, and overall, when civil society certifies and helps to reward desired 8 per cent of total greenhouse gas emissions are from practices, or when States block access to markets because tourism-related transportation and food consumption of undesirable practices {2.1.7}. Successful local governance {2.1.11, 2.1.15}. The demand for nature-based tourism or supported by recognition of local rights has often ecotourism has also risen, with mixed effects on nature and incorporated knowledge of how nature contributes to human local communities, including some potential for contributions wellbeing to motivate such behaviours {2.1.8}. National to local conservation, in particular when carried out at a agencies have also promoted land management strategies smaller scale {2.1.11}. that are more sustainable and introduced regulations, among other policy measures {2.1.9.2}, and have coordinated with 18 Distant areas of the world are increasingly other nations on global agreements to maintain nature’s connected, as consumption, production, and contributions to people {2.1.10}. Economic instruments that governance decisions increasingly influence may be harmful to nature include subsidies, financial materials, waste, energy, and information flows in transfers, subsidized credit, tax abatements, and prices for other countries, generating aggregate economic gains commodities and industrial goods that hide environmental while shifting economic and environmental costs, and social costs.

Such instruments favour unsustainable which can link to conflicts (established but production and, as a consequence, can promote incomplete) (Figure SPM.4). As per capita consumption deforestation, overfishing, urban sprawl, and wasteful uses of has risen, developed countries and rapidly growing water. In 2015, agricultural support potentially harmful to developing countries {2.1.2, 2.1.6}, while at times nature amounted to $100 billion in countries belonging to the supporting efficient production for exports, often reduce Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, water consumption and forest degradation nationally {2.1.6, although some subsidy reforms to reduce unsustainable 2.1.11} by importing crops and other resources, mainly from pesticide uses and adjust several other consequential developing countries {2.1.6}. The latter, as a result, see development practices have been introduced {2.1.9.1, declines in nature and its contributions to people (habitat, 6.4.5}. Fossil fuel subsidies valued at $345 billion result in climate, air and water quality) different from the exported global costs of $5 trillion when including the reduction of food, fibre and timber products (Figures SPM.1 and 5). nature’s contributions (coal accounts for about half of these Reduced, declining and unequal access to nature’s costs, petroleum for about one third and natural gas for contributions to people may, in a complex interaction with about one tenth {2.1.9.1.2}). In fisheries, subsidies to THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES Domestic material consumption increase and maintain capacity, which in turn often lead to deteriorating (established but incomplete) {2.2.4, the degradation of nature, constitute perhaps a majority of 2.2.5.3}.

Despite a long history of resource use, the tens of US$ billions spent on supports {5.3.2.5}. conservation conflicts related to colonial expansion and land appropriation for parks and other uses {3.2} (well 20 Much of the world’s terrestrial wild and established), indigenous peoples and local communities domesticated biodiversity lies in areas traditionally have often managed their landscapes and seascapes in managed, owned, used or occupied by indigenous ways that were adjusted to local conditions over peoples and local communities (well established) generations. These management methods often remain (Figure SPM.5) {2.2.4}. In spite of efforts at all levels, compatible with, or actively support, biodiversity although nature on indigenous lands is declining less conservation by “accompanying” natural processes with rapidly than elsewhere, biodiversity and the anthropogenic assets (established but incomplete) {2.2.4, knowledge associated with its management are still 2.2.5.3.1} (Figure SPM.5).

atipac / snot egarevA Extraction of living biomass 16 20 12 15 8 10 4 5 0 0 raey / snot noillim latoT 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 Protection of Key Biodiversity Air pollution Areas (KBAs) s 80 40 a e s ra d 60 K fo e tc e 30 % to e g rp y a re b d 20 20 ve A re v o c 0 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 *Fine particles: < 2.5 micrograms erusopxe launna naem egarevA *)3m / gμ( selcitrap enfi ot Gross domestic product (GDP) (domestic consumption and exports) 2020 1970198019902000 20102020 1970198019902000 20102020 Fertilizer use d 800 n a l e lb 600 a ra fo a 400 h / g K 200 n a e 2020 1970198019902000 20102020 1970198019902000 20102020 )$ tnatsnoc 0102( noillirT Developed Developing Least developed World Figure SPM 4 D evelopment pathways since 1970 for selected key indicators of human- environment interactions, which show a large increase in the scale of global economic growth and its impacts on nature, with strong contrasts across developed, developing, and least developed countries. Countries are classified according to the United Nations World Economic Situation and Prospects (https://www.un.org/development/ desa/dpad/publication/world-economic-situation-and-prospects-2019/). Global gross domestic product has risen fourfold in real terms, with the vast majority of growth occurring in developed and developing countries A. Extraction of living biomass (e.g., crops, fish) to meet the demand for domestic consumption and for export is highest in developing countries and rising rapidly B.

However, material consumption per capita within each country (from imports and domestic production) is highest in developed countries. Overall protection of Key Biodiversity Areas is rising, being highest within developed countries D. Air pollution is highest in least developed countries E, while the challenges of non-point-source pollution from the use of fertilizers are highest in developing countries. Data sources: A, E, F: www.data.worldbank.org; B, C: www.materialflows.net; D: www.keybiodiversityareas.org, www. protectedplanet.net. THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES DOMESTICATION CREATING NEW ECOSYSTEMS a Domesticating and b … and animal breeds c Creating cultural landscapes d Developing production maintaining crops… with enhanced habitat systems with a multitude of heterogeneity domestic and wild species 2) Formally designated PROTECTION protected areas AApppprrooxx.. 3355%% ooff aarreeaa 22)) CONCEPTS AApppprrooxx.. 3355%% ooff aarreeaa 33)) 1) Land areas 33)) RReemmaaiinniinngg tteerrrreessttrriiaall traditionally owned, aarreeaass wwiitthh vveerryy llooww managed, used, or hhuummaann iinntteerrvveennttiioonn h Preventing forest loss occupied by ((aarreeaass wwiitthh <<44 indigenous peoples FFoooottpprriinntt IInnddeexx)) SUSTAINABLE USE, MANAGEMENT, AND MONITORING i Alternative values and worldviews e Habitat management f Wild species management g Restoration Figure SPM 5 C ontributions of indigenous peoples and local communities to the enhancement and maintenance of wild and domesticated biodiversity and landscapes. Indigenous and local knowledge systems are locally based, but regionally manifested and thus globally relevant. A wide diversity of practices actively and positively contributes to wild and domestic biodiversity through “accompanying” natural processes with anthropogenic assets (knowledge, practices and technology).

Indigenous peoples often manage the land and coastal areas based on culturally specific world views, applying principles and indicators such as the health of the land, caring for the country and reciprocal responsibility. As lifestyles, values and external pressures change with globalization, however, unsustainable practices are becoming increasingly common in certain regions10. The image in the centre of the above figure shows the global overlap between 1) land areas traditionally owned, managed11, used, or occupied by indigenous peoples; 2) formally designated protected areas; and 3) remaining terrestrial areas with very low human intervention (areas that score <4 on the Human Footprint Index12). Circles and overlapping sections are proportional in area. Land areas traditionally owned, managed11, used, or occupied by indigenous peoples overlap with approximately 35 per cent of the area that is formally protected, and approximately 35 per cent of all remaining terrestrial areas with very low human intervention.

The topics and pictures in the figure aim to illustrate, not represent, the types and diversity of the following contributions of indigenous peoples and local communities to biodiversity: a domestication and maintenance of locally adapted crop and fruit varieties (potatoes, Peru) and b animal breeds (rider and sheep, Kyrgyzstan) {2.2.4.4}; c creation of species- rich habitats and high ecosystem diversity in cultural landscapes (hay meadows, Central Europe) {2.2.4.1-2}; d identification of useful plants and their cultivation in high-diversity ecosystems (multi-species forest garden, Indonesia) {2.2.4.3}; e and f management and monitoring of wild species, habitats and landscapes for wildlife and for increased resilience ( e - Australia, f - Alaska) {2.2.4.5- 6}; g restoration of degraded lands (Niger) {3.2.4}; h prevention of deforestation in recognized indigenous territories (Amazon basin, Brazil) {2.2.4.7}; i offering alternative concepts of relations between humanity and nature (Northern Australia). 10 11 12 10. In Stephen Garnett et al., “A spatial overview of the global importance of that fulfils material and non-material cultural needs, including livelihood Indigenous lands for conservation”, Nature Sustainability, Vol. 1 (July 2018) activities such as hunting, fishing, gathering, resource harvesting, pp. 369–374. pastoralism, and small-scale agriculture and horticulture. 11. These data sources define land management here as the process of 12. Venter, O. et al. Global terrestrial Human Footprint maps for 1993 and 2009. determining the use, development and care of land resources in a manner Sci. Data 3, sdata201667 (2016).

,/1tra/2ssi/21lov/gro.yteicosdnaygoloce.www//:sptth .la te nohciM )d( ,iabaB leinaD© )c( ,okdelesO valsehcayV/OAF© )b( ,ilopseC ordnaS/OAF© )a( :stiderc sotohP .alrurrupuJ namkcoR leinaD© )i( spaM elgooG )h( ,FLG/zenodrO ogirdoR© )g( ,evedaV )f( ,driB egeilB accebeR© )e( THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES At least one quarter of the global land area is traditionally indigenous peoples are becoming islands of biological managed13, owned, used or occupied by indigenous and cultural diversity surrounded by areas in which nature peoples. These areas include approximately 35 per cent has further deteriorated (established but incomplete) of the area that is formally protected, and approximately {2.2.5.3}. Among the local indicators developed and used 35 per cent of all remaining terrestrial areas with very by indigenous peoples and local communities, 72 per cent low human intervention (established but incomplete) show negative trends in nature that underpinned local {2.2.5.3.1}. Community-based conservation institutions livelihoods (established but incomplete) {2.2.5.3.2}. Major and local governance regimes have often been effective, trends include declining availability of resources – due at times even more effective than formally established in part to legal and illegal territory reductions, despite protected areas, in preventing habitat loss (established but expanding indigenous populations – as well as declining incomplete).

Several studies have highlighted contributions health and populations of culturally important species; by indigenous peoples and local communities in limiting new pests and invasive alien species as climate changes; deforestation, as well as initiatives showing synergies losses in both natural forest habitats and grazing lands; between these different mechanisms (well established) and declining productivity in remnant ecosystems. A more {6.3.2, 2.2.5.3}. In many regions, however, the lands of detailed global synthesis of trends in nature observed by indigenous peoples and local communities is hindered by 13. These data sources define land management here as the process of determining the use, development and care of land resources in a manner the lack of institutions that gather data for these locations that fulfils material and non-material cultural needs, including livelihood and then synthesize them within regional and global activities such as hunting, fishing, gathering, resource harvesting, pastoralism, and small-scale agriculture and horticulture. summaries {2.2.2}. C. Goals for conserving and sustainably using nature and achieving sustainability cannot be met by current trajectories, and goals for 2030 and beyond may only be achieved through transformative changes14 across economic, social, political and technological factors. 21 There has been good progress towards the national efforts to meet the Aichi Targets (established but components of 4 of the 20 Aichi Biodiversity Targets incomplete) {3.2}. under the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020.

Moderate progress has been achieved towards some 22 Conservation actions, including protected components of 7 more targets, but for 6 others, poor areas, efforts to manage unsustainable use and progress has been made towards all components. address the illegal capture and trade of species, and There is insufficient information to assess progress the translocation and eradication of invasive species, towards some or all components of the remaining have been successful in preventing the extinction of 3 targets (established but incomplete) {3.2}. Overall, some species (established but incomplete). For the state of nature continues to decline (12 of 16 example, conservation investment during the period indicators show significantly worsening trends) (well between 1996 and 2008 reduced the extinction risk for established) {3.2} (Figure SPM.6). 14 mammals and birds in 109 countries by a median value of 29 per cent per country, while the rate of decrease in By 2015, greater progress had been made in implementing extinction risk for birds, mammals and amphibians would policy responses and actions to conserve biodiversity for have been at least 20 per cent higher without conservation drivers with an impact on coral reefs and other ecosystems action in recent decades. Similarly, it is likely that at least vulnerable to climate change (established but incomplete) 6 species of ungulate (e.g., the Arabian Oryx and {3.2}. Anthropogenic drivers of biodiversity loss, including Przewalski’s Horse) would now be extinct or surviving only habitat loss as a result of land-use and sea use change in captivity without conservation measures.

At least 107 (addressed by Aichi Target 5), unsustainable agriculture, highly threatened birds, mammals and reptiles (e.g., the aquaculture and forestry (Aichi Target 7), unsustainable Island Fox and the Seychelles Magpie-Robin) are estimated fishing (Aichi Target 6), pollution (Aichi Target 8), and invasive to have benefited from invasive mammal eradication on alien species (Aichi Target 9) are increasing globally, despite islands {3.2.2}. Although still few and spatially localized, such cases show that with prompt and appropriate action, it 14. A fundamental, system-wide reorganization across technological, economic and social factors, including paradigms, goals and values.

is possible to reduce human-induced extinction rates THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES Progress towards the Aichi Targets Goal Target Target element (abbreviated) Poor Moderate Good Address the underlying drivers 1.1 Awareness of biodiversity 1.2 Awareness of steps to conserve 2.1 Biodiversity integrated into poverty reduction 2.2 Biodiversity integrated into planning 2.3 Biodiversity integrated into accounting 2.4 Biodiversity integrated into reporting 3.1 Harmful subsidies eliminated and reformed 3.2 Positive incentives developed and implemented 4.1 Sustainable production and consumption 4.2 Use within safe ecological limits Reduce direct pressures 5.1 Habitat loss at least halved 5.2 Degradation and fragmentation reduced 6.1 Fish stocks harvested sustainably 6.2 Recovery plans for depleted species Unknown 6.3 Fisheries have no adverse impact 7.1 Agriculture is sustainable 7.2 Aquaculture is sustainable 7.3 Forestry is sustainable 8.1 Pollution not detrimental 8.2 Excess nutrients not detrimental 9.1 Invasive alien species prioritized 9.2 Invasive alien pathways prioritized Unknown 9.3 Invasive species controlled or eradicated 9.4 Invasive introduction pathways managed 10.1 Pressures on coral reefs minimized 10.2 Pressures on vulnerable ecosystems minimized Improve biodiversity status 11.1 10 per cent of marine areas conserved 11.2 17 per cent of terrestrial areas conserved 11.3 Areas of importance conserved 11.4 Protected areas, ecologically representative 11.5 Protected areas, effectively and equitably managed 11.6 Protected areas, well-connected and integrated 12.1 Extinctions prevented 12.2 Conservation status of threatened species improved 13.1 Genetic diversity of cultivated plants maintained 13.2 Genetic diversity of farmed animals maintained 13.3 Genetic diversity of wild relatives maintained 13.4 Genetic diversity of valuable species maintained Unknown 13.5 Genetic erosion minimized benefi ts to all Enhance 14.1 Ecosystems providing services restored and safeguarded 14.2 Taking account of women, IPLCs, and other groups Unknown 15.1 Ecosystem resilience enhanced Unknown 15.2 15 per cent of degraded ecosystems restored Unknown 16.1 Nagoya Protocol in force 16.2 Nagoya Protocol operational Enhance implementation 17.1 NBSAPs developed and updated 17.2 NBSAPs adopted as policy instruments 17.3 NBSAPs implemented 18.1 ILK and customary use respected 18.2 ILK and customary use integrated Unknown 18.3 IPLCs participate effectively Unknown 19.1 Biodiversity science improved and shared 19.2 Biodiversity science applied Unknown 20.1 Financial resources for Strategic Plana increased THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES Abbreviations: ILK: indigenous and local knowledge; IPLCs: indigenous peoples and local communities; NBSAPs: national biodiversity strategies and action plans.

a Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020. Figure SPM 6 Summary of progress towards the Aichi Targets. Scores are based on a quantitative analysis of indicators, a systematic review of the literature, the fifth National Reports to the Convention on Biological Diversity and the information available on countries’ stated intentions to implement additional actions by 2020. Progress towards target elements is scored as “Good” (substantial positive trends at a global scale relating to most aspects of the element); “Moderate” (the overall global trend is positive, but insubstantial or insufficient, or there may be substantial positive trends for some aspects of the element, but little or no progress for others; or the trends are positive in some geographic regions, but not in others); “Poor” (little or no progress towards the element or movement away from it; or, despite local, national or case-specific successes and positive trends for some aspects, the overall global trend shows little or negative progress); or “Unknown” (insufficient information to score progress). (established but incomplete) {2.2.5.2.4, 4}. There are, and 16), but the current focus and wording of the related however, few other counterfactual studies assessing how targets obscures or omits their relationship to nature trends in the state of nature or pressures upon nature would (established but incomplete). have been different in the absence of conservation efforts (well established) {3.2}.

24 To achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and the 2050 Vision for Biodiversity, future targets are 23 Biodiversity and ecosystem functions and likely to be more effective if they take into account the services directly underpin the achievement of several impacts of climate change (well established) {3.2, 3.3}. of the Sustainable Development Goals, including For example, climate change is projected to greatly increase those on water and sanitation, climate action, life the number of species under threat, with fewer species below water and life on land (Sustainable expanding their ranges or experiencing more suitable Development Goals 6, 13, 14 and 15), (well climatic conditions than the number of species experiencing established) {3.3.2.1}. Nature also plays an important range contraction or less suitable conditions (established and complex role in the achievement of the but incomplete) {4.2, 3.2}. The impact of climate change on Sustainable Development Goals related to poverty, the effectiveness of protected areas calls for a re-evaluation hunger, health and well-being and sustainable cities of conservation objectives; meanwhile, there are currently (Sustainable Development Goals 1, 2, 3 and 11) few protected areas whose objectives and management (established but incomplete) {3.3.2.2} (Figure SPM.7). take climate change into account (established but Several examples illustrate the interdependencies between incomplete). The Sustainable Development Goals for nature and the Sustainable Development Goals.

For poverty, health, water and food security, and sustainability example, nature and its contributions may play an important targets are closely linked through the impacts of multiple role in reducing vulnerability to climate-related extreme direct drivers, including climate change, on biodiversity and events and other economic, social and environmental ecosystem functions and services, nature and nature’s shocks and disasters, although anthropogenic assets are contributions to people and good quality of life. In a also involved (established but incomplete). Nature’s post-2020 global biodiversity framework, placing greater underpinning of specific health targets varies across regions emphasis on the interactions between the targets of the and ecosystems, is influenced by anthropogenic assets and Sustainable Development Goals {4.6, 3.7} may provide a remains understudied. The relationship can be positive or way forward for achieving multiple targets, as synergies (and negative, as in the case of certain aspects of biodiversity trade-offs) can be considered. Future targets are expected and infectious diseases (see paragraph 2 of the present to be more effective if they take into account the impacts of document). Nature directly underpins the livelihoods of climate change, including on biodiversity, and action to indigenous peoples and local communities and the rural and mitigate and adapt to climate change {4.6, 3.7}.

urban poor, largely through direct consumption or through the income generated by trade in material contributions 25 The adverse impacts of climate change on such as food (see paragraphs 2 and 36 of the present biodiversity are projected to increase with increasing document) and energy (well established). Such contributions warming, so limiting global warming to well below 2°C are generally underrepresented in poverty analyses would have multiple co-benefits for nature and nature’s (established but incomplete).

Nature and its contributions contributions to people and quality of life; however, it is are also relevant to the Goals for education, gender equality, projected that some large-scale land-based mitigation reducing inequalities and promoting peace, justice and measures to achieve that objective will have strong institutions (Sustainable Development Goals 4, 5, 10 significant impacts on biodiversity (established but THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES Recent status and trends in aspects of nature and nature’s Selected Sustainable contributions to people that Uncertain Selected targets (abbreviated) Development Goals support progress towards target *relationship Poor/Declining Partial support support 1.1 Eradicate extreme poverty U 1.2 Halve the proportion of people in poverty U No poverty 1.4 Ensure that all have equal rights to economic resources 1.5 Build the resilience of the poor 2.1 End hunger and ensure access to food all year round 2.3 Double productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers Zero hunger 2.4 Ensure sustainable food production systems 2.5 Maintain genetic diversity of cultivated plants and farmed animals 3.2 End preventable deaths of newborns and children U Good 3.3 End AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and neglected tropical diseases U health and 3.4 Reduce premature mortality from non-communicable diseases Unknown well-being 3.9 Reduce deaths and illnesses from pollution Unknown 6.3 Improve water quality Clean 6.4 Increase water use and ensure sustainable withdrawals water and 6.5 Implement integrated water resource management sanitation 6.6 Protect and restore water-related ecosystems 11.3 Enhance inclusive and sustainable urbanization Sustainable 11.4 Protect and safeguard cultural and natural heritage cities and 11.5 Reduce deaths and the number of people affected by disasters communities 11.6 Reduce the adverse environmental impact of cities 11.7 Provide universal access to green and public spaces 13.1 Strengthen resilience to climate-related hazards 13.2 Integrate climate change into policies, strategies and planning Climate 13.3 Improve education and capacity on mitigation and adaptation Unknown action 13a Mobilize US$100 billion/year for mitigation by developing Unknown countries 13b Raise capacity for climate change planning and management Unknown 14.1 Prevent and reduce marine pollution 14.2 Sustainably manage and protect marine and coastal ecosystems 14.3 Minimize and address ocean acidifi cation Life below 14.4 Regulate harvesting and end overfi shing water 14.5 Conserve at least 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas 14.6 Prohibit subsidies contributing to overfi shing 14.7 Increase economic benefi ts from sustainable use of marine resources 15.1 Ensure conservation of terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems 15.2 Sustainably manage and restore degraded forests and halt deforestation 15.3 Combat desertifi cation and restore degraded land 15.4 Conserve mountain ecosystems 15.5 Reduce degradation of natural habitats and prevent extinctions Life on land 15.6 Promote fair sharing of benefi ts from use of genetic resources 15.7 End poaching and trafficking 15.8 Prevent introduction and reduce impact of invasive alien species 15.9 Integrate biodiversity values into planning and poverty reduction 15a Increase fi nancial resources to conserve and sustainably use biodiversity 15b Mobilize resources for sustainable forest management * There were no targets that were scored as good/positive status and trends Figure SPM 7 S ummary of recent status and trends in aspects of nature and nature’s contributions to people that support progress towards achieving selected targets of the Sustainable Development Goals.

The targets selected are those where the current evidence and wording of the target make it possible to assess the consequences of the trends in nature and nature’s contribution to people as they relate to the achievement of the target. Chapter 3, Section 3.3 provides THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES an assessment of the evidence of the links between nature and the Sustainable Development Goals. The scores for the targets are based on a systematic assessment of the literature and a quantitative analysis of the indicators, where possible. None of the targets scored “Full support” (that is, having a good status or substantial positive trends on a global scale). Consequently, the score of “Full support” was not included in the table. “Partial support” means that the overall global status and trends are positive, but still insubstantial or insufficient; or there may be substantial positive trends for some relevant aspects, but negative trends for others; or the trends are positive in some geographic regions, but negative in others. “Poor/Declining support” indicates poor status or substantial negative trends at a global scale. “Uncertain relationship” means that the relationship between nature and/or nature’s contributions to people and the achievement of the target is uncertain. “Unknown” indicates that there is insufficient information to score the status and trends. incomplete) {4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5}. All climate model biodiversity (well established) {4.2.2.2, 4.2.2.3.1}.

Climate trajectories show that limiting human-induced climate change alone is projected to decrease ocean net primary change to well below 2°C requires immediate, rapid production by between 3 and 10 per cent, and fish biomass reductions in greenhouse gas emissions or a reliance on by between 3 and 25 per cent (in low and high warming substantial carbon dioxide removal from the atmosphere. scenarios, respectively) by the end of the century (established However, the land areas required for bioenergy crops (with but incomplete) {4.2.2.2.1}. Whether or not the current or without carbon capture and storage), afforestation and removal of nearly 30 per cent of anthropogenic carbon reforestation to achieve the targeted carbon uptake rates dioxide emissions by terrestrial ecosystems continues into the are projected to be very large {4.2.4.3., 4.5.3}. The future varies greatly from one scenario to the next and biodiversity and environmental impact of large-scale depends heavily on how climate change, atmospheric carbon afforestation and reforestation depends to a large degree on dioxide and land-use change interact. Important regulating where these occur (prior vegetation cover, state of contributions of nature, such as coastal and soil protection, degradation), and the tree species planted (established but crop pollination and carbon storage, are projected to decline incomplete). Likewise, large bioenergy crop or afforested (established but incomplete) {4.2.4, 4.3.2.1}.

In contrast, areas are expected to compete with areas set aside for substantial increases in food, feed, timber and bioenergy conservation, including restoration, or agriculture production are predicted in most scenarios (well established) (established but incomplete). Consequently, large-scale {4.2.4, 4.3.2.2}. Scenarios that include substantial shifts land-based mitigation measures may jeopardize the towards sustainable management of resource exploitation achievement of other Sustainable Development Goals that and land use, market reform, globally equitable and moderate depend on land resources (well established) {4.5.3}. In animal protein consumption, and reduction of food waste and contrast, the benefits of avoiding and reducing deforestation losses result in low loss or even recovery of biodiversity (well and promoting restoration can be significant for biodiversity established) {4.2.2.3.1, 4.2.4.2, 4.3.2.2, 4.5.3}. (well established) and are expected to have co-benefits for local communities (established but incomplete) {4.2.4.3}. 27 The magnitude of the impacts on biodiversity and ecosystem functions and services and the differences 26 Biodiversity and nature’s regulating contributions between regions are smaller in scenarios that focus on to people are projected to decline further in most global or regional sustainability (well established) scenarios of global change over the coming decades, (Figure SPM.8).

Sustainability scenarios that explore while the supply and demand for nature’s material moderate and equitable consumption result in substantially contributions to people that have current market value lower negative impacts on biodiversity and ecosystems due (food, feed, timber and bioenergy) are projected to to food, feed and timber production (well established) {4.1.3, increase (well established) {4.2, 4.3} (for example, see 4.2.4.2, 4.3.2, 4.5.3}. The general patterns at the global level Figure SPM.8). These changes arise from continued human – namely, declines in biodiversity and regulating contributions population growth, increasing purchasing power, and versus increases in the production of food, bioenergy and increasing per capita consumption. The projected effects of materials – are evident in nearly all subregions {4.2.2, 4.2.3, climate change and land use change on terrestrial and 4.2.4, 4.3.3}. For terrestrial systems, most studies indicate freshwater biodiversity are mostly negative, increase with the that South America, Africa and parts of Asia will be much degree of global warming and land use change, and have an more significantly affected than other regions, especially in impact on marine biodiversity through increased scenarios that are not based on sustainability objectives (see eutrophication and deoxygenation of coastal waters (well Figure SPM.8 as an example). That is due in part to regional established) {4.2.2.3.2, 4.2.3, 4.2.4}.

For instance, a climate change differences and in part to the fact that synthesis of many studies estimates that the fraction of scenarios generally foresee the largest land use conversions species at risk of extinction due to climate change is 5 per to crops or bioenergy in those regions {4.1.5, 4.2.4.2}. cent at 2°C warming, rising to 16 per cent at 4.3°C warming Regions such as North America and Europe are expected to {4.2.1.1}. Climate change and business-as-usual fishing have low conversion to crops and continued reforestation scenarios are expected to worsen the status of marine {4.1.5, 4.2.4.2}. THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA ASIA OCEANIA Central and Scenarios Eastern Europe Central Asia Western Asia South Asia South-East Asia North-East Asia Oceania Western Europe Global sustainability Regional competition Economic optimism Indicator Species richness Material NCP CENTRAL AND Regulating NCP WESTERN EUROPE CENTRAL ASIA Change between MESOAMERICACARIBBEAN WESTERN ASIA 2015 and 2050 WEST AFRICA EAST AFRICA SOUTHEAST ASIA SOUTH AMERICA AFRICA ADJACENT Scenarios North America Mesoamerica South America Caribbean North Africa West Africa Central Africa Southern Africa East Africa and adjacent islands Global sustainability Regional competition Economic optimism Figure SPM 8 P rojections of the impacts of land use and climate change on biodiversity and nature’s material and regulating contributions to people between 2015 and 2050.

This figure illustrates three main messages: i) the impacts on biodiversity and on nature’s contributions to people (NCP) are the lowest in the “global sustainability” scenario in nearly all sub-regions, ii) regional differences in impacts are high in the regional competition and economic optimism scenario, and iii) material NCP increase the most in the regional competition and economic optimism scenarios, but this comes at the expense of biodiversity and regulating NCP. Projected impacts are based on a subset of the Shared Socioeconomic Pathway (SSP) scenarios and greenhouse gas emissions trajectories (RCP) developed in support of Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change assessments. This figure does not cover the scenarios that include transformative change that are discussed in Chapter 5. THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES • The “Global sustainability” scenario combines proactive environmental policy and sustainable production and consumption with low greenhouse gas emissions (SSP1, RCP2.6; top rows in each panel); • The “Regional competition” scenario combines strong trade and other barriers and a growing gap between rich and poor with high emissions (SSP3, RCP6.0; middle rows); and • The “Economic optimism” scenario combines rapid economic growth and low environmental regulation with very high greenhouse emissions (SSP5, RCP8.5; bottom rows).

Multiple models were used with each of the scenarios to generate the first rigorous global-scale model comparison estimating the impact on biodiversity (change in species richness across a wide range of terrestrial plant and animal species at regional scales; orange bars), material NCP (food, feed, timber and bioenergy: purple bars) and regulating NCP (nitrogen retention, soil protection, crop pollination, crop pest control and ecosystem carbon storage and sequestration: white bars). The bars represent the normalized means of multiple models and the whiskers indicate the standard errors. The global means of percentage changes in individual indicators can be found in Figure 4.2.14. 28 Climate change impacts also play a major role in populations projected to move poleward due to ocean regionally-differentiated projections of biodiversity warming, meaning that local species extinctions are and ecosystem functioning in both marine and expected in the tropics (well established) {4.2.2.2.1}. terrestrial systems. Novel communities, where However, that does not necessarily imply an increase in species will co-occur in historically unknown biodiversity in the polar seas, because of the rapid rate of combinations, are expected to emerge (established sea ice retreat and the enhanced ocean acidification of cold but incomplete) {4.2.1.2, 4.2.4.1} Substantial climate waters (established but incomplete) {4.2.2.2.4}.

Along change-driven shifts of terrestrial biome boundaries, in coastlines, the upsurge in extreme climatic events, sea level particular in boreal, subpolar and polar regions and in (semi-) rise and coastal development are expected to cause arid environments, are projected for the coming decades; a increased fragmentation and loss of habitats. Coral reefs are warmer, drier climate will reduce productivity in many places projected to undergo more frequent extreme warming (well established) {4.2.4.1}. In contrast, rising atmospheric events, with less recovery time in between, declining by a carbon dioxide concentrations can be beneficial for net further 70–90 per cent at global warming of 1.5°C, and by primary productivity and can enhance woody vegetation more than 99 per cent at warming of 2°C, causing massive cover, especially in semi-arid regions (established but bleaching episodes with high coral mortality rates (well incomplete) {4.2.4.1}. For marine systems, impacts are established) {4.2.2.2.2}. expected to be geographically variable, with many fish D. Nature can be conserved, restored and used sustainably while simultaneously meeting other global societal goals through urgent and concerted efforts fostering transformative change. 29 The Sustainable Development Goals and the measures are necessary to enable transformative change 2050 Vision for Biodiversity cannot be achieved over the long term (up to 2050) to address the indirect without transformative change, the conditions for drivers that are the root causes of the deterioration of nature which can be put in place now (well established) {2, 3, (well established), including changes in social, economic 5, 6.2} (Figure SPM.9).

Increasing awareness of and technological structures within and across nations {6.2, interconnectedness in the context of the environmental crisis 6.3, 6.4} (SPM Table.1). and new norms regarding interactions between humans and nature would support that change (well established) {5.3, 30 Sustainability transformations call for cross- 5.4.3}. In the short term (before 2030), all decision makers sectoral thinking and approaches (Figure SPM.9). could contribute to sustainability transformations, including Sectoral policies and measures can be effective in through enhanced and improved implementation and particular contexts, but often fail to account for enforcement of effective existing policy instruments and indirect, distant and cumulative impacts, which can regulations, and the reform and removal of harmful existing have adverse effects, including the exacerbation of policies and subsidies (well established). Additional inequalities (well established). Cross-sectoral THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES approaches, including landscape approaches, integrated approaches, such as mainstreaming across government watershed and coastal zone management, marine spatial sectors, are focused on the relationships between sectors planning, bioregional scale planning for energy, and new and policies and help to ensure policy coherence and urban planning paradigms offer opportunities to reconcile effectiveness (well established). Inclusive approaches help to multiple interests, values and forms of resource use, provided reflect a plurality of values and ensure equity (established that these cross-sectoral approaches recognize trade-offs but incomplete), including through equitable sharing of and uneven power relations between stakeholders benefits arising from their use and rights-based approaches (established but incomplete) {5.4.2, 5.4.3, 6.3, 6.4}. (established but incomplete).

Informed governance entails novel strategies for knowledge production and co- 31 Transformative change is facilitated by production that are inclusive of diverse values and innovative governance approaches that incorporate knowledge systems (established but incomplete). Adaptive existing approaches, such as integrative, inclusive, approaches, including learning from experience, monitoring informed and adaptive governance. While such and feedback loops, contribute to preparing for and approaches have been extensively practised and managing the inevitable uncertainties and complexities studied separately, it is increasingly recognized that associated with social and environmental changes together, they can contribute to transformative (established but incomplete) {6.2, 5.4.2}. change (established but incomplete) {6.2}. They help to address governance challenges that are common to many 32 A summary of the evidence related to the sectors and policy domains and create the conditions for components of pathways to sustainability suggests implementing transformative change.

Integrative that there are five overarching types of management Integrative, adaptive, informed and inclusive governance approaches including smart policy mixes, applied especially at leverage points • Incentives and capacity building LEVERAGE POINTS • Cross-sectoral cooperation • Embrace diverse visions • Pre-emptive action of a good life • Decision-making in the context of • Reduce total consumption and waste Iterative resilience and uncertainty learning loop • Unleash values and action • Environmental law and implementation • Reduce inequalities • Practice justice and inclusion in conservation • Internalize externalities and telecouplings • Ensure environmentally friendly technology, innovation and investment • Promote education and knowledge generation and sharing Figure SPM 9 T ransformative change in global sustainability pathways. Collaborative implementation of priority governance interventions (levers) targeting key points of intervention (leverage points) could enable transformative change from current trends towards more sustainable ones. Most levers can be applied at multiple leverage points by a range of actors, such as intergovernmental organizations, governments, non-governmental organizations, citizen and community groups, indigenous peoples and local communities, donor agencies, science and educational organizations, and the private sector, depending on the context. Implementing existing and new instruments through place-based governance interventions that are integrative, informed, inclusive and adaptive, using strategic policy mixes and learning from feedback, could enable global transformation. sruoivaheb dna seulaV Demographic Fisheries Land/sea-use and change sociocultural Agriculture Energy Economic and Direct technological Forestry exploitation Mining Institutions and Climate change governance Tourism Pollution Infrastructure Conflicts and Invasive species epidemics Conservation etc.

Others THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES interventions, or levers, and eight leverage points that ecologically representative networks of interconnected are key for achieving transformative change (Figure protected areas to cover key biodiversity areas and SPM.9; D3 and D4 above) {5.4.1, 5.4.2}. The notion of managing trade-offs between societal objectives that levers and leverage points recognizes that complex global represent diverse worldviews and multiple values of nature systems cannot be managed simply, but that in certain (established but incomplete) {6.3.2.3, 6.3.3.3}. Safeguarding cases, specific interventions can be mutually reinforcing and protected areas into the future also entails enhancing can generate larger-scale changes towards achieving monitoring and enforcement systems, managing shared goals (well established) (Table SPM.1). For biodiversity-rich land and sea beyond protected areas, example, changes in laws and policies can enable and addressing property rights conflicts and protecting underpin changes in resource management and environmental legal frameworks against the pressure of consumption, and in turn, changes in individual and powerful interest groups. In many areas, conservation collective behaviour and habits can facilitate the depends on building capacity and enhancing stakeholder implementation of policies and laws {5.4.3}.

collaboration, involving non-profit groups as well as indigenous peoples and local communities to establish and 33 Changes towards sustainable production and manage marine protected areas and marine protected area consumption and towards reducing and transforming networks, and proactively using instruments such as residues and waste, particularly changes in landscape-scale and seascape-scale participatory scenarios consumption among the affluent, is recognized by and spatial planning, including transboundary conservation some individuals and communities worldwide as planning (well established) {5.3.2.3, 6.3.2.3, 6.3.3.3}. central to sustainable development and reducing Implementation beyond protected areas includes combating inequalities. While actual reductions have been wildlife and timber trafficking through effective enforcement limited, actions already being taken at different levels and ensuring the legality and sustainability of trade in wildlife. can be improved, coordinated and scaled up (well Such actions include prioritizing the prosecution of wildlife established). Those include introducing and improving trafficking in criminal justice systems, using community- standards, systems and relevant regulations aimed at based social marketing to reduce demand and internalizing the external costs of production, extraction and implementing strong measures to combat corruption at all consumption (such as pricing wasteful or polluting practices, levels (established but incomplete) {6.3.2.3}. including through penalties); promoting resource efficiency and circular and other economic models; voluntary 35 Integrated landscape governance entails a mix of environmental and social certification of market chains; and policies and instruments that together ensure nature incentives that promote sustainable practices and conservation, ecological restoration and sustainable innovation.

Importantly, they also involve a change in the use, sustainable production (including of food, definition of what a good quality of life entails – decoupling materials and energy), and sustainable forest the idea of a good and meaningful life from ever-increasing management and infrastructure planning, and that material consumption. All those approaches are more address the major drivers of biodiversity loss and effective when they are mutually reinforcing. Actions that nature deterioration (well established) {6.3.2, 6.3.6}. help to voluntarily unleash existing social values of Policy mixes that are harmonized across sectors, levels of responsibility in the form of individual, collective and governance and jurisdictions can account for ecological and organizational actions towards sustainability can have a social differences across and beyond the landscape, build powerful and lasting effect in shifting behaviour and on existing forms of knowledge and governance and cultivating stewardship as a normal social practice address trade-offs between tangible and non-tangible (established but incomplete) {5.4.1.2, 5.4.1.3, 6.4.2, 6.4.3}. benefits in a transparent and equitable manner (established but incomplete). Sustainable landscape management can 34 Expanding and effectively managing the current be better achieved through multifunctional, multi-use, network of protected areas, including terrestrial, multi-stakeholder and community-based approaches (well freshwater and marine areas, is important for established), using a combination of measures and safeguarding biodiversity (well established), practices, including: (a) well-managed and connected particularly in the context of climate change.

protected areas and other effective area-based conservation Conservation outcomes also depend on adaptive measures; (b) reduced impact logging, forest certification, governance, strong societal engagement, effective payment for ecosystem services, among other instruments, and equitable benefit-sharing mechanisms, sustained and reduced emissions from deforestation and forest funding, and monitoring and enforcement of rules degradation; (c) support for ecological restoration; (well established) {6.2, 5.4.2}. National Governments play (d) effective monitoring, including public access and a central role in supporting primary research, effective participation as appropriate; (e) addressing illegal activities; conservation and the sustainable use of multi-functional (f) the effective implementation of multilateral environmental landscapes and seascapes. This entails planning agreements and other relevant international agreements by THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES their parties; and (g) promoting sustainable, biodiversity- 37 Ensuring sustainable food production from the based food systems (well established) {6.3.2.1, 6.3.2.3, oceans while protecting biodiversity entails policy 6.3.2, 6.3.2.4}. action to apply sustainable ecosystem approaches to fisheries management; spatial planning (including the 36 Feeding the world in a sustainable manner, implementation and expansion of marine protected especially in the context of climate change and areas); and more broadly, policy action to address population growth, entails food systems that ensure drivers such as climate change and pollution (well adaptive capacity, minimize environmental impacts, established) {5.3.2.5, 6.3.3}. Scenarios show that the eliminate hunger, and contribute to human health and pathways to sustainable fisheries entail conserving, restoring animal welfare (established but incomplete) {5.3.2.1, and sustainably using marine ecosystems, rebuilding 6.3.2.1}.

Pathways to sustainable food systems entail overfished stocks (including through targeted limits on land-use planning and sustainable management of catches or fishing efforts and moratoria), reducing pollution both the supply/producer and the demand/consumer (including plastics), managing destructive extractive sides of food systems (well established) {5.3.2.1, activities, eliminating harmful subsidies and illegal, 6.3.2.1, 6.4}. Options for sustainable agricultural production unreported and unregulated fishing, adapting fisheries are available and continue to be developed, with some management to climate change impacts and reducing the having more impacts on biodiversity and ecosystem environmental impact of aquaculture (well established) {4, functions than others {6.3.2.1}. These options include 5.3.2.5, 6.3.3.3.2}. Marine protected areas have integrated pest and nutrient management, organic demonstrated success in both biodiversity conservation and agriculture, agroecological practices, soil and water improved local quality of life when managed effectively and conservation practices, conservation agriculture, can be further expanded through larger or more agroforestry, silvopastoral systems, irrigation management, interconnected protected areas or new protected areas in small or patch systems and practices to improve animal currently underrepresented regions and key biodiversity welfare. These practices could be enhanced through areas (established but incomplete) {5.3.2.5; 6.3.3.3.1}. Due well-structured regulations, incentives and subsidies, the to major pressures on coasts (including from development, removal of distorting subsidies {2.3.5.2, 5.3.2.1, 5.4.2.1, land reclamation and water pollution), implementing marine 6.3.2}, and – at landscape scales – by integrated landscape conservation initiatives, such as integrated coastal planning, planning and watershed management.

Ensuring the outside of protected areas is important for biodiversity adaptive capacity of food production entails the use of conservation and sustainable use (well established) measures that conserve the diversity of genes, varieties, {6.3.3.3}. Other measures to expand multi-sectoral cultivars, breeds, landraces and species, which also cooperation on coastal management include corporate contributes to diversified, healthy and culturally-relevant social responsibility measures, standards for building and nutrition. Some incentives and regulations may contribute to construction, and eco-labelling (well established) {6.3.3.3.2, positive changes at both the production and consumption 6.3.3.3.4}. Additional tools could include both non-market ends of supply chains, such as the creation, improvement and market-based economic instruments for financing and implementation of voluntary standards, certification and conservation, including for example payment for ecosystem supply-chain agreements (e.g., the Soy Moratorium) and the services, biodiversity offset schemes, blue-carbon reduction of harmful subsidies. Regulatory mechanisms sequestration, cap-and-trade programmes, green bonds could also address the risks of co-option and lobbying, and trust funds and new legal instruments, such as the where commercial or sectoral interests may work to proposed international, legally binding instrument on the maintain high levels of demand, monopolies and continued conservation and sustainable use of marine biological use of pesticides and chemical inputs {5.3.2.1}. Non- diversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction under the regulatory alternatives are also important, and potentially United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea include technical assistance – especially for small-holders – (established but incomplete) {6.3.3.2, 6.3.3.1.3, and appropriate economic incentive programs, for example, 5.4.2.1, 5.4.1.7}.

some payment for ecosystem services programmes and other non-monetary instruments {5.4.2.1}. Options that 38 Sustaining freshwater in the context of climate address and engage other actors in food systems (including change, rising demand for water extraction and the public sector, civil society, consumers and grassroots increased levels of pollution involves both cross- movements) include participatory on-farm research, the sectoral and sector-specific interventions that promotion of low-impact and healthy diets and the improve water-use efficiency, increase storage, localization of food systems. Such options could help reduce sources of pollution, improve water quality, reduce food waste, overconsumption, and the demand for minimize disruption and foster the restoration of animal products that are produced unsustainably, which natural habitats and flow regimes (well established) could have synergistic benefits for human health {6.3.4}. Promising interventions include practising integrated (established but incomplete) {5.3.2.1, 6.3.2.1}. water resource management and landscape planning across THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES scales; protecting wetland biodiversity areas; guiding and restoration and expansion, promoting urban gardens, limiting the expansion of unsustainable agriculture and maintaining and designing for ecological connectivity, and mining; slowing and reversing the de-vegetation of promoting accessibility for all (with benefits for human catchments; and mainstreaming practices that reduce health). Additional solutions include disseminating new, erosion, sedimentation, and pollution run-off and minimize low-cost technologies for decentralized wastewater the negative impact of dams (well established) {6.3.4.6}. treatment and energy production and creating incentives to Sector-specific interventions include improved water-use reduce over-consumption {6.3.5}.

Integrating cross-sectoral efficiency techniques (including in agriculture, mining and planning at the local, landscape and regional levels is energy), decentralized rainwater collection (for example, important, as is involving diverse stakeholders (well household-based), integrated management of surface and established). Particularly important at the regional scale are groundwater (e.g., “conjunctive use”), locally-developed policies and programmes that promote sustainability- water conservation techniques, and water pricing and minded collective action {5.4.1.3}, protect watersheds incentive programmes (such as water accounts and beyond city jurisdictions and ensure the connectivity of payment for ecosystem services programmes) {6.3.4.2, ecosystems and habitats (e.g., through green belts). At the 6.3.4.4}. With regard to watershed payment for ecosystem regional scale, cross-sectoral approaches to mitigating the services programmes, their effectiveness and efficiency can impact of infrastructure and energy projects entail support be enhanced by acknowledging multiple values in their for comprehensive environmental impact assessments and design, implementation and evaluation and setting up strategic environmental assessments of local and regional impact evaluation systems (established but incomplete) cumulative impacts {6.3.6.4, 6.3.6.6}. {6.3.4.4}. Investment in infrastructure, including in green infrastructure, is important, especially in developing 40 Decision makers have a range of options and countries, but it can be undertaken in a way that takes into tools for improving the sustainability of economic and account ecological functions and the careful blending of built financial systems (well established) {6.4}. Achieving a and natural infrastructure {5.3.2.4, 6.3.4.5}.

sustainable economy involves making fundamental reforms to economic and financial systems and 39 Meeting the Sustainable Development Goals in tackling poverty and inequality as vital parts of cities and making cities resilient to climate change sustainability (well established) {6.4}. Governments entails solutions that are sensitive to social, economic could reform subsidies and taxes to support nature and its and ecological contexts. Integrated city-specific and contributions to people, removing perverse incentives and landscape-level planning, nature-based solutions and instead promoting diverse instruments such as payments built infrastructure, and responsible production and linked to social and environmental metrics, as appropriate consumption can all contribute to sustainable and (established but incomplete) {6.4.1}. At the international equitable cities and make a significant contribution to level, options for reacting to the challenges generated by the the overall climate change adaptation and mitigation displacement of the impacts of unsustainable consumption effort. Urban planning approaches to promote sustainability and production on nature include both rethinking include encouraging compact communities, designing established instruments and developing new instruments to nature-sensitive road networks and creating low-impact account for long-distance impacts. Trade agreements and infrastructure and transportation systems (from an emissions derivatives markets could be reformed to promote equity and land-use perspective), including active, public and and prevent the deterioration of nature, although there are shared transport {5.3.2.6, 6.3.5}. However, given that most uncertainties associated with implementation (established urban growth between now and 2030 will take place in the but incomplete) {6.4.4}.

Alternative models and measures of Global South, major sustainability challenges include economic welfare (such as inclusive wealth accounting, creatively and inclusively addressing the lack of basic natural capital accounting and degrowth models) are infrastructure (water, sanitation and mobility), the absence of increasingly considered as possible approaches to spatial planning, and the limited governance capacity and balancing economic growth and the conservation of nature financing mechanisms. Those challenges also offer and its contributions and to recognizing trade-offs, the opportunities for locally-developed innovation and pluralism of values, and long-term goals (established but experimentation, which will create new economic incomplete) {6.4.5}. Structural changes to economies are opportunities. A combination of bottom-up and city-level also key to shifting action over long timescales. Such efforts through public, private, community and Government changes include technological and social innovation regimes partnerships, can be effective in promoting low-cost and and investment frameworks that internalize environmental locally-adapted solutions to maintaining and restoring impacts, such as the externalities of economic activities, biodiversity and ecosystem functions and services. including by addressing environmental impacts in socially Nature-based options include combining grey and green just and appropriate ways (well established) {5.4.1.7}.

infrastructure (such as wetland and watershed restoration Although such market-based policy instruments as and green roofs), enhancing green spaces through payments for ecosystem services, voluntary certification and THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES biodiversity offsetting have increased in use, their internalization of environmental impacts, including effectiveness is mixed, and they are often contested; thus, externalities associated with long-distance trade, is they should be carefully designed and applied to avoid considered both an outcome and a component of national perverse effects in context (established but incomplete) and global sustainable economies (well established) {5.4.2.1, 6.3.2.2, 6.3.2.5, 6.3.6.3}. The widespread {5.4.1.6, 6.4}. Table SPM 1 Approaches for sustainability and possible actions and pathways for achieving them. The appropriateness and relevance of different approaches varies according to place, system, decision-making process and scale. The list of actions and pathways in the following table is illustrative rather than exhaustive and uses examples from the assessment report. Approaches for Possible actions and pathways to achieve transformative change sustainability Key actors: (IG=intergovernmental organizations, G=Governments, NGOs =non-governmental organizations, CG=citizen and community groups, IPLC = indigenous peoples and local communities, D=donor agencies, SO= science and educational organizations, P=private sector) Enabling integrative • Implementing cross-sectoral approaches that consider linkages and interconnections between sectoral governance to ensure policies and actions (e.g., IG, G, D, IPLC) {6.2} {D1}. policy coherence and • Mainstreaming biodiversity within and across different sectors (e.g., agriculture, forestry, fisheries, mining, effectiveness tourism) (e.g., IG, G, NGO, IPLC, CG, P, D) {6.2, 6.3.5.2} {D5}.

• Encouraging integrated planning and management for sustainability at the landscape and seascape levels (e.g., IG, G, D) {6.3.2} {D5}. • Incorporating environmental and socioeconomic impacts, including externalities, into public and private decision-making (e.g., IG, G, P) {5.4.1.6} {B5}. • Improving existing policy instruments and using them strategically and synergistically in smart policy mixes (e.g., IG, G) {6.2, 6.3.2, 6.3.3.3.1, 6.3.4.6, 6.3.5.1, 6.3.6.1} {D4}. Promoting inclusive • Recognizing and enabling the expression of different value systems and diverse interests while governance formulating and implementing policies and actions (e.g., IG, G, IPLCs, CG, NGO, SO, D) {6.2} {B5, D5}. approaches • Enabling the inclusion and participation of indigenous peoples and local communities, and women and girls through stakeholder in environmental governance and recognizing and respecting the knowledge, innovations, and practices, engagement and institutions and values of indigenous peoples and local communities, in accordance with national legislation the inclusion of (e.g., G, IPLC, P) {6.2, 6.2.4.4} {D5}. indigenous peoples • Facilitating national recognition for land tenure, access and resource rights in accordance with national and local communities legislation, and the application of free, prior and informed consent and fair and equitable benefit-sharing to ensure equity and arising from their use (e.g., G, IPLC, P) {D5}. participation • Improving collaboration and participation among indigenous peoples and local communities, other relevant stakeholders, policymakers and scientists to generate novel ways of conceptualizing and achieving transformative change towards sustainability (e.g., G, IG, D, IPLC, CG, SO) {D5}.

Practicing informed • Improving the documentation of nature (e.g., biodiversity inventory and other inventories) and the governance for assessment of the multiple values of nature, including the valuation of natural capital by both private and nature and nature’s public entities (e.g., SO, D, G, IG, P) {6.2} {D2}. contributions to people • Improving the monitoring and enforcement of existing laws and policies through better documentation and information-sharing and regular, informed and adaptive readjustments to ensure transparent and enhanced results as appropriate (e.g., IG, G, IPLC, P) {D2}. • Advancing knowledge co-production and including and recognizing different types of knowledge, including indigenous and local knowledge and education, that enhances the legitimacy and effectiveness of environmental policies (e.g., SO, IG, G, D) {B6, D3}. Promoting adaptive • Enabling locally tailored choices about conservation, restoration, sustainable use and development governance and connectivity that account for uncertainty in environmental conditions and scenarios of climate change (e.g., G, management IPLC, CG, P) {D3}. • Promoting public access to relevant information as appropriate in decision-making and responsiveness to assessments by improving monitoring, including setting goals and objectives with multiple relevant stakeholders, who often have competing interests (e.g., IG, G). • Promoting awareness-raising activities around the principles of adaptive management, including through using short, medium and long-term goals that are regularly reassessed towards international targets (e.g., IG, G, SO, CG, D) {D4}.

• Piloting and testing well-designed policy innovations that experiment with scales and models (e.g., G, D, SO, • Increasing the effectiveness of current and future international biodiversity targets and goals (such as those of the post-2020 global biodiversity framework and of the Sustainable Development Goals), (e.g., IG, G, THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES Approaches for Possible actions and pathways to achieve transformative change sustainability Key actors: (IG=intergovernmental organizations, G=Governments, NGOs =non-governmental organizations, CG=citizen and community groups, IPLC = indigenous peoples and local communities, D=donor agencies, SO= science and educational organizations, P=private sector) Managing sustainable and multifunctional landscapes and seascapes and some of the actions they may entail Producing and • Promoting sustainable agricultural practices, including good agricultural practices, agroecology, among consuming food others, multifunctional landscape planning and cross-sectoral integrated management {6.3.2}. sustainably • Sustainable use of genetic resources in agriculture, including by conserving gene diversity, varieties, cultivars, breeds, landraces and species (e.g., SO, IPLC, CG) {6.3.2.1} {A6}. • Promoting the use of biodiversity-friendly management practices in crop and livestock production, forestry, fisheries and aquaculture, including, where relevant, the use of traditional management practices associated with indigenous peoples and local communities {6.3.2.1} {D6}. • Promoting areas of natural or semi-natural habitat within and around production systems, including those that are intensively managed, and restoring or reconnecting damaged or fragmented habitats where necessary • Improving food market transparency (e.g., traceability of biodiversity impacts, transparency in supply chains) through tools such as labelling and sustainability certification.

• Improving equity in food distribution and in the localization of food systems, where appropriate and where beneficial to nature or nature’s contributions to people (NCP). • Reducing food waste from production to consumption. • Promoting sustainable and healthy diets {6.3.2.1} {D6}. Integrating multiple • Promoting multifunctional, multi-use and multi-stakeholder approaches and improving community-based uses for sustainable approaches to forest governance and management to achieve sustainable forest management (e.g., IG, G, CG, forests IPLC, D, SO, P) {6.3.2.2} {A4}. • Supporting the reforestation and ecological restoration of degraded forest habitats with appropriate species, giving priority to native species (e.g., G, IPLC, CG, D, SO) {6.3.2.2} {A4}. • Promoting and strengthening community-based management and governance, including customary institutions and management systems, and co-management regimes involving indigenous peoples and local communities (e.g., IG, G, CG, IPLC, D, SO, P) {6.3.2.2} {D5}. • Reducing the negative impact of unsustainable logging by improving and implementing sustainable forest management, and addressing illegal logging (e.g., IG, G, NGO, P) {6.3.2.2} {D1}. • Increasing efficiency in forest product use, including incentives for adding value to forest products (such as sustainability labelling or public procurement policies), as well as promoting intensive production in well- managed forests so as to reduce pressures elsewhere (e.g., P, D, NGO) {6.3.2.2} {B1}.

Conserving, effectively • Supporting, expanding and promoting effectively managed and ecologically representative networks managing and of well-connected protected areas and other multifunctional conservation areas, such as other effective area- sustainably using based conservation measures (e.g., IG, G, IPLC, CG, D) {3.2.1, 6.3.2.3} {C1, D7}. terrestrial landscapes • Using extensive, proactive and participatory landscape-scale spatial planning to prioritize land uses that balance and further safeguard nature and to protect and manage key biodiversity areas and other important sites for present and future biodiversity (e.g., IG, G, D) {B1, D7}. • Managing and restoring biodiversity beyond protected areas, (e.g., IG, G, CG, IPLC, P, NGO, D) {B1}. • Developing robust and inclusive decision-making processes that facilitate the positive contributions of indigenous peoples and local communities to sustainability by incorporating locally-attuned management systems and indigenous and local knowledge {B6, D5}. • Improving and expanding the levels of financial support for conservation and sustainable use through a variety of innovative options, including through partnerships with the private sector {6.3.2.5} {D5, D7, D10}. • Prioritizing land-based adaptation and mitigation measures that do not have negative impacts on biodiversity (e.g., reducing deforestation, restoring land and ecosystems, improving the management of agricultural systems such as soil carbon, and preventing the degradation of wetlands and peatlands) {D8}. • Monitoring the effectiveness and impacts of protected areas and other effective area-based conservation measures. Promoting sustainable • Promoting shared and integrated ocean governance, including for biodiversity, beyond national governance and jurisdictions (e.g., IG, G, NGO, P, SO, D) {6.3.3.2} {D7}.

management of • Expanding, connecting and effectively managing marine protected area networks (e.g., IG, G, IPLC, CG seascapes, oceans {5.3.2.3} {D7}, including protecting and managing priority marine key biodiversity areas and other important and marine systems sites for present and future biodiversity, and increasing protection and connectivity. • Promoting the conservation and/or restoration of marine ecosystems through rebuilding overfished stocks; preventing, deterring and eliminating illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing; encouraging ecosystem-based fisheries management; and controlling pollution through the removal of derelict gear and through addressing plastics pollution (e.g., IG, G, P, IPLC, CG, SO, D) {B1, D7}. • Promoting ecological restoration, remediation and the multifunctionality of coastal structures, including through marine spatial planning (e.g., IG, G, NGO, P, CG, IPLC, SO, D) {6.3.3.3.1} {B1, D7}. • Integrating ecological functionality concerns into the planning phase of coastal construction (e.g., IG, G, NGO, P, CG, IPLC, SO, D) {6.3.3.3.1} {B1, D7}. • Expanding multi-sectoral cooperation by increasing and improving corporate social responsibility measures and regulation in building and construction standards, and eco-labelling and best practices (e.g., IG, G, NGO, P, CG, IPLC, SO, D) {6.3.3.3.1} {B1, D7}.

THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES Table SPM 1 (continued) Approaches for Possible actions and pathways to achieve transformative change sustainability Key actors: (IG=intergovernmental organizations, G=Governments, NGOs =non-governmental organizations, CG=citizen and community groups, IPLC = indigenous peoples and local communities, D=donor agencies, SO= science and educational organizations, P=private sector) Promoting sustainable • Encouraging effective fishery reform strategies through incentives with positive impacts on biodiversity and governance and through the removal of environmentally harmful subsidies (e.g., IG, G) {6.3.3.2} {D7}. management of • Reducing the environmental impacts of aquaculture by voluntary certification and by using best practices in seascapes, oceans fisheries and aquaculture production methods (e.g., G, IPLC, NGO, P) {6.3.3.3.2, 6.3.3.3.5} {B1, D7}. and marine systems • Reducing point and nonpoint source pollution, including by managing marine microplastic and macroplastic pollution through effective waste management, incentives and innovation (e.g., G, P, NGO) {6.3.3.3.1} {B1, D7}. • Increasing ocean conservation funding (e.g., G, D, P) {6.3.3.1.3} {D7}. Improving freshwater • Integrating water resource management and landscape planning, including through increased protection management, and connectivity of freshwater ecosystems, improving transboundary water cooperation and management, protection and addressing the impacts of fragmentation caused by dams and diversions, and incorporating regional analyses connectivity of the water cycle (e.g., IG, G, IPLC, CG, NGO, D, SO, P) {6.3.4.6, 6.3.4.7} {B1}. • Supporting inclusive water governance, e.g., through developing and implementing invasive alien species management with relevant stakeholders (e.g., IG, G, IPLC, CG, NGO, D, SO, P) {6.3.4.3} {D4}.

• Supporting co-management regimes for collaborative water management and to foster equity between water users (while maintaining a minimum ecological flow for the aquatic ecosystems), and engaging stakeholders and using transparency to minimize environmental, economic and social conflicts {D4}. • Mainstreaming practices that reduce soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution run-off (e.g., G, CG, P) {6.3.4.1}. • Reducing the fragmentation of freshwater policies by coordinating international, national and local regulatory frameworks (e.g., G, SO) {6.3.4.7, 6.3.4.2}. • Increasing water storage by facilitating groundwater recharge, wetlands protection and restoration, alternative storage techniques and restrictions on groundwater abstraction. (e.g., G, CG, IPLC, P, D) {6.3.4.2} {B1, B3}. • Promoting investment in water projects with clear sustainability criteria (e.g., G, P, D, SO) {6.3.4.5} {B1, B3}. Building sustainable • Engaging sustainable urban planning (e.g., G, CG, IPLC, NGO, P) {6.3.5.1} {D9}. cities that address • Encouraging densification for compact communities, including through brownfield development and other critical needs while strategies {6.3.5.3}. conserving nature, • Including biodiversity protection, biodiversity offsetting, river basin protection, and ecological restoration restoring biodiversity, in regional planning {6.3.5.1}. maintaining and enhancing ecosystem • Safeguarding urban key biodiversity areas and ensuring that they do not become isolated through services incompatible uses of surrounding land {6.3.5.2, SM 6.4.2}. • Promoting biodiversity mainstreaming through stakeholder engagement and integrative planning (e.g., G, NGO, CG, IPLC) {6.3.5.3}. • Encouraging alternative business models and incentives for urban conservation {6.3.2.1}. • Promoting sustainable production and consumption {6.3.6.4}.

• Promoting nature-based solutions (e.g., G, NGO, SO, P) {6.3.5.2} {D8, D9}. • Promoting, developing, safeguarding or retrofitting green and blue infrastructure (for water management) while improving grey (hard) infrastructure to address biodiversity outcomes, {6.3.5.2}. • Promoting ecosystem-based adaptation within communities {3.7, 5.4.2.2}. • Maintaining and designing for ecological connectivity within urban spaces, particularly with native species • Increasing urban green spaces and improving access to them {6.3.2}. • Increasing access to urban services for low-income communities, with priorities for sustainable water management, integrated sustainable solid waste management and sewage systems, and safe and secure shelter and transport (e.g., G, NGO) {6.3.5.4} {D9}. Promoting sustainable • Developing sustainable strategies, voluntary standards and guidelines for sustainable renewable energy energy and and bioenergy projects (e.g., G, SO, P) {6.3.6} {D8}. infrastructure projects • Strengthening and promoting biodiversity-inclusive environmental impact assessments, laws and guidelines and production {6.3.6.2} {B1}. • Mitigating environmental and social impacts where possible and promoting innovative financing and restoration when necessary (e.g., G, P, NGO, D) {6.3.6.3} {B1}, including by redesigning incentive programmes and policies to promote bioenergy systems that optimize trade-offs between biodiversity loss and benefits (e.g., through life cycle analysis) {D8}. • Supporting community-based management and decentralized sustainable energy production (e.g., G, CG, IPLC, D) {6.3.6.4, 6.3.6.5} {D9}. • Reducing energy demands so as to reduce the demand for biodiversity-impacting infrastructure (e.g., through energy efficiency, new clean energy and reducing unsustainable consumption) (e.g., G, P) {B1}.

THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES Approaches for Possible actions and pathways to achieve transformative change sustainability Key actors: (IG=intergovernmental organizations, G=Governments, NGOs =non-governmental organizations, CG=citizen and community groups, IPLC = indigenous peoples and local communities, D=donor agencies, SO= science and educational organizations, P=private sector) Improving the • Developing and promoting incentive structures to protect biodiversity (e.g., removing harmful incentives) sustainability of (e.g., IG, G) {6.4} {D10}. economic and financial • Promoting sustainable production and consumption, such as through: sustainable sourcing, resource systems efficiency and reduced production impacts, circular and other economic models, corporate social responsibility, life-cycle assessments that include biodiversity, trade agreements and public procurement policies (e.g., G, CA, NGO, SO) {6.4.3, 6.3.2.1} {D10}. • Exploring alternative methods of economic accounting such as natural capital accounting and Material and Energy Flow Accounting, among others (e.g., IG, G, SO) {6.4.5} {D10}. • Encouraging policies that combine poverty reduction with measures to increase the provision of nature’s contributions and the conservation and sustainable use of nature (e.g., IG, G, D) {3.2.1} {C2}. • Improving market-based instruments, such as payment for ecosystem services, voluntary certification and biodiversity offsetting, to address challenges such as equity and effectiveness (e.g., G, P, NGO, IPLC, CG, • Reducing consumption (e.g., encouraging consumer information to reduce overconsumption and waste, using public policies and regulations and internalizing environmental impacts) (e.g., G, P, NGO) {B4, C2}. • Creating and improving supply-chain models that reduce the impact on nature {D3}.

THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES Conceptual framework and definitions Global Good quality of life Human wellbeing Living in harmony with nature Living-well in balance and harmony with Mother Earth Nature’s contributions Anthropogenic assets Direct drivers to people Ecosystem goods Natural drivers and services Institutions National Nature’s gifts and governance Anthropogenic and other drivers indirect drivers Local Changing over time Baseline-Trends-Scenarios Figure SPM A 1 T he IPBES conceptual framework. Source: Díaz et al. (2015). Figure SPM A1. The IPBES Conceptual Framework is those of indigenous peoples and local communities. Text in a highly simplified model of the complex interactions green denotes scientific concepts, and text in blue denotes between the natural world and human societies. The concepts originating in other knowledge systems. The solid model identifies the main elements (boxes within the main arrows in the main panel denote influence between elements, panel outlined in grey), together with their interactions (arrows and dotted arrows denote links that are acknowledged as in the main panel), that are most relevant to the Platform’s important, but that are not the main focus of the Platform. The goal. “Nature”, “nature’s contributions to people” and “good thick coloured arrows below and to the right of the central quality of life” (indicated as black headlines and defined in panel indicate the scales of time and space, respectively.

each corresponding box) are inclusive categories that were This conceptual framework was accepted by the Plenary in identified as meaningful and relevant to all stakeholders decision IPBES-2/4, and the Plenary took note of an update involved in IPBES during a participatory process, including presented in IPBES/5/INF/24 and in decision IPBES-5/1. various disciplines of the natural and social sciences and Further details and examples of the concepts defined in the the humanities, and other knowledge systems, such as box can be found in the glossary and in Chapter 1. selacs laitaps ssorca gnitcaretnI epocS noituloser fo level Figure 1 5 The IPBES conceptual framework. Source: Díaz et al. (2015). Nature Biodiversity and ecosystems Mother Earth Systems of life Intrinsic values Elements of nature and society that are in the focus of IPBES Infl uences between the elements of nature and society that are in the focus of IPBES Infl uences between the elements of nature and society that are outside the focus of IPBES Intrinsic value (beyond human experience) Changes and interactions across space and time Scope and resolution of IPBES across scales Text Inclusive category labels intelligible for all stakeholders Text Category labels of western science Text Category labels of other knowledge systems THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES Nature, in the context of the Platform, refers to the natural or ritual fishing or hunting) or not (e.g., individual trees or world, with an emphasis on biodiversity. Within the context ecosystems as sources of inspiration).

of science, it includes categories such as biodiversity, ecosystems, ecosystem functioning, evolution, the Drivers of change refers to all those external factors that biosphere, humankind’s shared evolutionary heritage, and affect nature, anthropogenic assets, nature’s contributions biocultural diversity. Within the context of other knowledge to people and good quality of life. They include institutions systems, it includes categories such as Mother Earth and governance systems and other indirect drivers, and and systems of life. Other components of nature, such direct drivers (both natural and anthropogenic). as deep aquifers, mineral and fossil reserves, and wind, solar, geothermal and wave power, are not the focus of Institutions and governance systems and other the Platform. Nature contributes to societies through the indirect drivers are the ways in which societies provision of contributions to people. organize themselves and the resulting influences on other components. They are the underlying causes of Anthropogenic assets refers to built-up infrastructure, environmental change that are exogenous to the ecosystem health facilities, knowledge (including indigenous and local in question. Because of their central role, influencing all knowledge systems and technical or scientific knowledge, aspects of human relationships with nature, they are key as well as formal and non-formal education), technology levers for decision-making. “Institutions” encompasses (both physical objects and procedures), and financial assets, all formal and informal interactions among stakeholders among others.

Anthropogenic assets have been highlighted and the social structures that determine how decisions to emphasize that a good life is achieved by a co-production are taken and implemented, how power is exercised, and of benefits between nature and societies. how responsibilities are distributed. To varying degrees, institutions determine the access to and control, allocation Nature’s contributions to people refers to all the and distribution of the components of nature and of contributions that humanity obtains from nature. Ecosystem anthropogenic assets and their contributions to people. goods and services, considered separately or in bundles, Examples of institutions are systems of property and are included in this category. Within other knowledge access rights to land (e.g., public, common-pool or private), systems, nature’s gifts and similar concepts refer to the legislative arrangements, treaties, informal social norms benefits of nature from which people derive good quality and rules, including those emerging from indigenous and of life. Aspects of nature that can be negative to people local knowledge systems, and international regimes such (detriments), such as pests, pathogens or predators, are as agreements against stratospheric ozone depletion or also included in this broad category. for the protection of endangered species of wild fauna and flora.

Economic policies, including macroeconomic, fiscal, Nature’s regulating contributions to people refers monetary or agricultural policies, play a significant role in to functional and structural aspects of organisms and influencing people’s decisions and behaviour and the way ecosystems that modify the environmental conditions in which they relate to nature in the pursuit of benefits. experienced by people, and/or sustain and/or regulate the However, many of the drivers of human behaviour and generation of material and non-material contributions. For preferences, which reflect different perspectives on a good example, these contributions include water purification, quality of life, work largely outside the market system. climate regulation and the regulation of soil erosion. Direct drivers, both natural and anthropogenic, affect Nature’s material contributions to people refers to nature directly. “Natural drivers” are those that are not substances, objects or other material elements from the result of human activities and are beyond human nature that sustain people’s physical existence and the control. These include earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and infrastructure (i.e. the basic physical and organizational tsunamis, extreme weather or ocean-related events such structures and facilities, such as buildings, roads, power as prolonged drought or cold periods, tropical cyclones supplies) needed for the operation of a society or enterprise. and floods, the El Niño/La Niña Southern Oscillation They are typically physically consumed in the process of and extreme tidal events.

The direct anthropogenic being experienced, such as when plants or animals are drivers are those that are the result of human decisions, transformed into food, energy, or materials for shelter or namely, of institutions and governance systems and other ornamental purposes. indirect drivers. Anthropogenic drivers include habitat conversion, e.g., degradation of land and aquatic habitats, Nature’s non-material contributions to people refers to deforestation and afforestation, exploitation of wild nature’s contribution to people’s subjective or psychological populations, climate change, pollution of soil, water and quality of life, individually and collectively. The entities that air and species introductions. Some of these drivers, such provide these intangible contributions can be physically as pollution, can have negative impacts on nature; others, consumed in the process (e.g., animals in recreational as in the case of habitat restoration, or the introduction THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES of a natural enemy to combat invasive species, can have components. What a good quality of life entails, however, is positive effects. highly dependent on place, time and culture, with different societies espousing different views of their relationships Good quality of life is the achievement of a fulfilled human with nature and placing different levels of importance on life, a notion which varies strongly across different societies collective versus individual rights, the material versus the and groups within societies.

It is a context-dependent state spiritual domain, intrinsic versus instrumental values, and of individuals and human groups, comprising access to the present time versus the past or the future. The concept food, water, energy and livelihood security, and also health, of human well-being used in many western societies and its good social relationships and equity, security, cultural variants, together with those of living in harmony with nature identity, and freedom of choice and action. From virtually and living well in balance and harmony with Mother Earth, all standpoints, a good quality of life is multidimensional, are examples of different perspectives on a good quality having material as well as immaterial and spiritual of life. Communication of the degree of confidence Established Well established but incomplete Inconclusive Unresolved THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES High High Low Robust Low QUANTITY AND QUALITY OF EVIDENCE Figure SPM A 2 The four-box model for the qualitative communication of confidence. Confidence increases towards the top-right corner as suggested by the increasing strength of shading. Source: IPBES (2016).15 In this assessment, the degree of confidence in each main Well established: there is a comprehensive meta- finding is based on the quantity and quality of evidence analysis or other synthesis or multiple independent and the level of agreement regarding that evidence (Figure studies that agree. SPM.A2). The evidence includes data, theory, models and expert judgement.

Further details of the approach Established but incomplete: there is general are documented in the note by the secretariat on the agreement, although only a limited number of studies information on work related to the guide on the production exist; there is no comprehensive synthesis, and/or the of assessments (IPBES/6/INF/17). studies that exist address the question imprecisely. Unresolved: multiple independent studies exist but their conclusions do not agree. Inconclusive: there is limited evidence and a 15. IPBES, Summary for policymakers of the assessment report of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and recognition of major knowledge gaps. Ecosystem Services on pollinators, pollination and food production. S.G. Potts, V. L. Imperatriz-Fonseca, H. T. Ngo, J. C. Biesmeijer, T. D. Breeze, L. V. Dicks, L. A. Garibaldi, R. Hill, J. Settele, A. J. Vanbergen, M. A. Aizen, S. A. Cunningham, C. Eardley, B. M. Freitas, N. Gallai, P. G. Kevan, A. Kovács-Hostyánszki, P. K. Kwapong, J. Li, X. Li, D. J. Martins, G. Nates-Parra, J. S. Pettis, R. Rader, and B. F. Viana (eds.)., secretariat of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, Bonn, Germany, 2016. Available at http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2616458. THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES Knowledge gaps In the course of conducting this assessment key information needs were identified. See draft table Appendix IV.

Data, inventories and monitoring on nature and the drivers of change Gaps on biomes and units of analysis Taxonomic gaps NCP-related gaps Links between nature, nature’s contributions to people and drivers with respect to targets and goals Integrated scenarios and modelling studies Potential policy approaches Indigenous peoples and local communities THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES Draft table of knowledge gaps Disclaimer: This table of knowledge gaps was prepared by the experts of the Global Assessment and presented to and considered by a working group established by the Plenary at its seventh session. The Plenary did not approve this table as part of the summary for policymakers. It is therefore included in draft form, which does not imply working group or Plenary approval.

Sector Knowledge gaps (in data, indicators, inventories, scenarios)16 Data, inventories and • Data on ecosystem processes (including rates of change) that underpin nature’s contributions to people and monitoring on nature ecosystem health and the drivers of • Data from monitoring of ecosystem condition (generally less well represented than ecosystem extent) change • Data on changing interactions among organisms and taxa • Impacts of increasing CO upon the total Net Primary Production of marine systems, and consequences for ecosystem function and nature’s contributions to people • Syntheses of how human impacts affect organismal traits and global patterns and trends in genetic composition • Data on extinction risks and population trends, especially for insects, parasites and fungal and microbial species • Indicators on the global extent and consequences of biotic homogenization, including genetic homogenization • Global spatial datasets on key threats, e.g., data on patterns in the intensity of unsustainable exploitation of species and ecosystems • More comprehensive understanding of how human-caused changes to any Essential Biodiversity Variable class (e.g., ecosystem structure) have impacts on others (e.g., community composition) and on nature’s contributions to people • Data gaps in key inventories: World Database on Protected Areas, the World Database of Key Biodiversity Areas™, red lists of threatened species and ecosystems, and the Global Biodiversity Information Facility • Monitoring of many listed species in the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora.

• Monitoring of the long-term effects of dumped waste, especially radioactive material and plastics • Data on the impacts of war and conflict on nature and nature’s contributions to people Gaps on biomes and • Inventories on under-studied ecosystems: freshwater, Arctic, marine/ocean, seabed, and wetlands units of analysis • Inventories in soil, benthic and freshwater environments, and the implications for ecosystem functions Taxonomic gaps • Basic data on many taxa (86 per cent of existing species on Earth and 91 per cent of species in the ocean still await description) • Extinction risks and population trends for the following taxonomic groups: insects, fungal species, microbial species (microorganisms) and parasites • Data on the genetic diversity and conservation status of breeds of farmed and domestic plants and animals NCP-related gaps • Data on the status of species and nature’s contributions to people linked to specific ecosystem functions • Systematic indicators to report the status and trends for categories of nature’s contributions to people • Data on the impacts and extent of nature’s contributions to people on quality of life, by major user group (also lacking an agreed typology on major user groups) • Data on the interrelationships between gender equality, nature and nature’s contributions to people • Data and information on NCP 10: regulation of detrimental organisms and biological processes (populations of vectors and vector-borne diseases) and overlaps with vulnerable human populations and ecosystem interactions • Data and information on NCP 9: the role of nature and nature’s contributions to people in mitigating or reducing vulnerability to disasters 16.

THE GLOBAL ASSESSMENT REPORT ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES Sector Knowledge gaps (in data, indicators, inventories, scenarios)16 Links between nature, • Understanding on how nature contributes to achieving targets (the positive and negative relationships between nature’s contributions nature and targets/goals like the Sustainable Development Goals) to people and drivers • Disaggregated data on the impacts that nature has on good quality of life, particularly across regions, societies, with respect to targets governance systems, and ecosystems and goals • Need for indicators for some Sustainable Development Goals and Aichi Biodiversity Targets (e.g., Aichi Biodiversity Target 15 on ecosystem resilience and contribution of biodiversity to carbon stocks and Target 18 on integration of traditional knowledge and effective participation of indigenous and local communities) • Better quantitative data to assess the Sustainable Development Goals and Aichi Targets where qualitative indicators havebeen dominant (9 out of 44 targets under the Sustainable Development Goals reviewed) • Data on the benefits to human mental health from exposure to natural environments • Indicators that reflect the heterogeneity of indigenous peoples and local communities Integrated scenarios • Regional and global socioeconomic scenarios explicitly considering the knowledge, views and perspectives of and modelling studies indigenous peoples and local communities • Regional and global ssocioeconomic scenarios developed for, by and in collaboration with indigenous peoples and local communities and their associated institutions • Quantitative data showing how nature, its contributions to people, and good quality of life interact and change in time along different pathways • Scenarios of the future of biodiversity which quantify the possible co-benefits related to nature’s contributions to people • Scenarios about nonmaterial benefits to people compared to material benefits and regulating benefits • Integrated scenarios for areas projected to experience significant impacts and possible regime shifts (e.g., Arctic, semi-arid regions, and small islands) • Knowledge about the interaction, feedback and spill-overs among regions within future global scenarios • Assessment of nature’s contributions to people across scenario archetypes with robust knowledge and quantitative estimates Potential policy • Data to analyse the effectiveness of many policy options and interventions, including: approaches a) Data on the comparative effectiveness of different area-based conservation mechanisms (e.g., protected areas, other effective area-based conservation measures) in conserving nature and nature’s contributions to people and contributing to good quality of life b) Indicators of the effectiveness of different restoration methodologies and to assess restoration progress over time (including values) c) Data on the comparative effectiveness of different processes of access and benefit sharing to ensure fairness and equity d) Better data on the global extent and forms of wildlife trafficking and its impacts on nature and nature’s contributions to people e) Data on the comparative effectiveness of different models for reconciling bioenergy and biodiversity conservation f) Data on the effectiveness of different schemes and models for payment for ecosystem services (PES), particularly the trade-offs that arise between policy goals, the integration of multiple values in PES, data on the profiles of PES participants and long-term monitoring of relational and behavioural implications of participation g) Data on the comparative effectiveness of different models of marine governance relating to conservation • Data on the extent of the participation of indigenous peoples and local communities in environmental governance • Indicators on the impacts of environmentally harmful subsidies and trends and effectiveness of their removal at the global level • Data on areas of uncertainty in applying the precautionary principle • Data on the monitoring of policy effectiveness to adapt and adjust policies and to share lessons • Data on the impacts of resource mobilization, using robust program evaluation methods (e.g., examples of successful use of funding including impacts of donor funding for conservation and impacts of specific biodiversity financing projects) • Data on the impacts of climate change on marine and coastal governance regimes • Data on the impacts of mainstreaming of biodiversity across sectors • Better data to develop biodiversity and environmental quality standards Indigenous • Agreed-upon methods to enable systematic processes of knowledge generation, collection and synthesis Peoples and Local regarding indigenous and local knowledge (for assessments and elsewhere) and participation of indigenous Communities peoples and local communities in this process • Syntheses of indigenous and local knowledge about the status and trends in nature • Data to assess how progress in achieving goals and targets affects indigenous peoples and local communities, either in positive or in negative ways • Trends in relation to the socioeconomic status of indigenous peoples and local communities (e.g., noting the lack of data differentiation in aggregate statistics) The Intergovernmental Science- Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) is the intergovernmental body which assesses the state of biodiversity and ecosystem services, in response to requests from Governments, the private sector and civil society.

The mission of IPBES is to strengthen the science-policy interface for biodiversity and ecosystem services for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, long-term human well-being and sustainable development. IPBES has a collaborative partnership arrangement with UNEP, UNESCO, FAO and UNDP. Its secretariat is hosted by the German government and located on the UN campus, in Bonn, Germany. Scientists from all parts of the world contribute to the work of IPBES on a voluntary basis. They are nominated by their government or an organisation, and selected by the Multidisciplinary Expert Panel (MEP) of IPBES. Peer review forms a key component of the work of IPBES to ensure that a range of views is reflected in its work, and that the work is complete to the highest scientific standards. ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES (IPBES) IPBES Secretariat, UN Campus Platz der Vereinten Nationen 1, D-53113 Bonn, Germany Tel. +49 (0) 228 815 0570 secretariat@ipbes.net www.ipbes.net 9 783947 851133

